© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
CHAPTER
7
Corporate Information Security and
Privacy Regulation
HIS CHAPTER FOCUSES ON special security issues faced by publicly traded
companies. Public companies must comply with a law that tries to improve
corporate responsibility and stop fraudulent financial reporting. Rules and regulations
created in response to the law impact information systems that process financial
data. The rules require that these systems be reviewed to make sure that they
appropriately control information security risks and threats to financial data.
T
This chapter reviews why Congress created this law. It also reviews how the law
influences information security practices. Finally, it discusses how this law affects
other kinds of organizations.
Chapter 7 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
How the Enron scandal led to securities-law reform
Why accurate financial reporting is important
What the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.What compliance and security controls are
How SOX influences other types of companies
What some corporate privacy issues are
What some case studies and examples are
Chapter 7 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the difference between public and private companies
Explain the history behind the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Discuss the main requirements of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Explain the role of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
Describe how Section 404 internal control requirements impact
information security
Discuss frameworks used to guide Sarbanes-Oxley internal control
requirements
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.The Enron Scandal and Securities-Law Reform
Enron. WorldCom. Tyco. Adelphia. These companies have come to represent a
wave of corporate scandal that plagued America in the early 2000s. Each company
engaged in varying levels of mismanagement, questionable financial deals, and
accounting fraud. The activities at these companies shook investor confidence in
U.S. corporations. They also tarnished the reputations of financial services
professionals such as analysts, accountants, and auditors. Consider the following:
Once called the “Most Innovative Company in America,” energy company Enron
filed for bankruptcy in December 2001. It used several different fraudulent
accounting methods to hide billions of dollars of debt from its investors and
lenders.
Cable company Adelphia filed for bankruptcy in June 2002. In 2004, a federal jury
convicted Adelphia’s founder of bank and securities fraud. He was sentenced to
15 years in prison.
Telecommunications company WorldCom filed for bankruptcy in July 2002. At the
time, it was the largest bankruptcy in U.S. history. In July 2005, a federal court
sentenced the chief executive officer (CEO) of WorldCom to 25 years in prison for
corporate fraud.
In June 2005, a jury convicted a former Tyco CEO of theft, conspiracy, securities
fraud, and falsifying business records. A court in New York sentenced him to
between 8 and 25 years in prison. He was ordered to pay restitution and fines of
more than $200 million.
The financial mismanagement at these companies contributed to the largest reform
in U.S. securities laws since the Great Depression. The Enron bankruptcy is the
case that spurred Congress to act. It is important to understand the Enron scandal to
appreciate how significant the reform was.
Corporate Fraud at Enron
The Enron case has become a part of American pop culture, as its name is now
synonymous with corporate greed and scandal. Nearly 20 years after the scandal, it
continues to hold our attention.
Enron, which was based in Houston, Texas, formed in 1985 through the merger
of two natural gas companies. Kenneth Lay was the CEO of the company. By the
mid-1990s, Enron was the leading U.S. natural gas company.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Public Versus Private Companies
A public company is also called a publicly traded company. Many investors own a public company, in which
investors own a portion of the company in the form of stock. A stock represents a share of a corporation’s
profits or assets. A person’s percentage of ownership in the corporation depends on how many shares of
stock he or she owns.
Shareholders are entitled to portions of a public company’s profits. Their share, called a dividend, represents
each shareholder’s portion of the company’s earnings. People who own more shares of stock receive larger
dividends.
Public corporations are allowed to sell stocks and bonds. A bond represents a loan to the corporation for a
specified period. The corporation must pay bondholders back the full value of the bond, plus interest.
However, a person who owns a corporate bond does not have any ownership in a corporation. Only stocks
represent an ownership interest. Stocks and bonds together are called securities.
In the United States, the stock of a public company is traded on a stock exchange. The two most popular
U.S. stock exchanges are the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) and the NASDAQ Stock Market. National
securities exchanges are registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). You can
learn more at https://www.sec.gov/fast-answers/divisionsmarketregmrexchangesshtml.html.
Almost all securities sold in the United States must be registered with the SEC. To register its securities, a
company must file documents about its financial condition with the SEC on a regular basis. Investors review
these documents to make informed investment decisions.
A public company is different from a privately held company, in which a small group of private investors
owns a privately held company. In some cases, the investors all might be members of the same family. A
private company does not have to answer to shareholders in the same way that a public company does. A
private company distributes its profits to its owners.
Private companies do not have to register with the SEC. They also do not have to file documents with the
SEC that show their financial position. The largest private companies in the United States include Cargill,
Koch Industries, and Albertsons. 1
Enron grew quickly because it took advantage of energy market deregulation in
the late 1980s. It bought and sold gas and electricity through futures contracts.
These investments were initially very successful. As it grew, Enron expanded into
other markets. It purchased steel mills, water utilities, and even tried to enter the
internet broadband market. It also expanded internationally, pursuing opportunities in
England, Mexico, and India.
From 1997 to 2001, Fortune magazine put Enron on its “Most Innovative
Companies in America” list. 2 In 2000, it named Enron to its “World’s Most Admired
Companies” list. 3 Enron grew from 7,500 employees in 1996 to more than 20,000
employees in 2001. Its stock was valuable. Enron encouraged its employees to
include Enron stock in their retirement portfolios.
To the outside world, Enron was a very successful company. Its required filings
with the U.S. SEC showed that it was making money. It appeared to be able to
translate its success in the energy markets to other markets. Financial analysts
continued to recommend Enron stock. Investors continued to buy it.
In reality, Enron was struggling. It lost billions of dollars on its international
investments. Enron also started to face increased competition in the energy
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.business. It began to lose its market share in energy futures contracts because other
energy companies started to use Enron’s own strategies to become profitable.
By the late 1990s, Enron was in financial trouble and needed to raise money to
meet its operating expenses. However, it did not want to do this in a way that would
alarm its investors or alert them to potential trouble, which could cause its stock price
to fall. Maintaining a high stock price was important to bring in new investors. It also
was critical to being able to maintain credit lines with banks.
FYI
A futures contract is a contract for the sale of a good. One party agrees to sell the other party an asset at
some point in the future. The two parties agree on the future quantity and price for the asset at the time the
contract is made. Companies use futures contracts as an investment tool rather than as an actual contract
to supply goods.
Enron executives engaged in several complicated financial transactions to hide
its losses. Its chief financial officer (CFO), Andrew Fastow, created several affiliated
companies, then hid Enron’s losses in the financial records of these companies. The
Enron CFO and other employees who worked with him owned many of these
affiliated companies and profited from the transactions between Enron and the
affiliated companies.
These transactions were very complex and complicated to understand because
Enron often changed the names of its different divisions. It also moved assets back
and forth between divisions. Many of these transactions violated traditional
accounting principles, which are called generally accepted accounting principles
(GAAP). They are the rules for the accounting process. Accountants prepare
financial statements according to these rules, which are designed to promote
accurate accounting records.
Enron also mislabeled loans that it received from banks to hide the transactions
on its own financial statements so that its investors would not know about them. By
some reports, Enron borrowed about $8.6 billion from 1992 to 2001. 4 However, it hid
these loans from its investors. During this time, Enron filed earnings statements with
the SEC that misstated its financial position. The SEC filings were hard to
understand. They also showed that Enron appeared to be making money.
In February 2001, CEO Kenneth Lay retired. The new CEO, Jeffrey Skilling, had
been instrumental in taking Enron into new trading markets in the 1990s. He and
CFO Andrew Fastow oversaw most of Enron’s business practices.
In April 2001, many financial analysts began to question Enron’s complicated
financial statements. 5 Enron, however, continued to portray the image of a
successful company. Jeffrey Skilling unexpectedly resigned from the CEO post in
August 2001, at which time the board of directors asked Kenneth Lay to return to
Enron as its CEO, which he did.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.In October 2001, Enron announced its first ever loss. The SEC noticed this
announcement and began to review Enron’s financial statements. Enron also began
its own investigation. In late October, the Enron board of directors established a
special committee, led by Director William C. Powers, to investigate the affiliated
companies created by Fastow. The report that the committee issued is known as the
“Powers Report.” 6
In November 2001, Enron announced that it was amending its 1997–2001
financial statements because of accounting errors. This announcement shook
investor confidence in Enron, and its stock price began to drop. Banks would no
longer issue it credit to meet its operating expenses. At the end of November 2001,
Enron stock was worth less than a dollar per share. 7
FYI
The Powers Report, released in February 2002, noted that Enron’s executive officers mismanaged many
aspects of the company’s business. It also placed blame on Enron’s Board of Directors for failing in its
corporate oversight duties. It blamed Enron’s accounting advisor, Arthur Andersen, for failing to provide
objective accounting advice. You can read a copy of the report at
http://i.cnn.net/cnn/2002/LAW/02/02/enron.report/powers.report.pdf.
On December 2, 2001, Enron filed for bankruptcy. At the time, it was the largest
bankruptcy ever. In January 2002, Enron removed its stock from the New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE). 8
The fallout from the Enron case was enormous. Employees who had invested
their retirement savings in Enron stock lost $1.3 billion. 9 The accounting firm Arthur
Andersen, Enron’s auditor, closed down. The U.S. government prosecuted many of
Enron’s top executives for their involvement in its business dealings. Some of these
prosecutions were difficult because it was hard to determine which executives were
involved in the fraud, and which executives were not. The complexity of Enron’s
financial dealings contributed to this difficulty.
CFO Andrew Fastow entered into a plea agreement with the U.S. government.
He agreed to testify against Jeffrey Skilling and Kenneth Lay in exchange for a
sentence of no more than 10 years in prison. In September 2006, a federal court
sentenced him to 6 years in prison. He also paid more than $30 million in restitution.
Fastow was released from prison in December 2011.
Enron founder and CEO Kenneth Lay was convicted in May 2006 for fraud and
conspiracy. He died of a heart attack in July 2006. The court vacated his conviction
after his death because he died before he could appeal.
Former CEO Jeffrey Skilling was convicted in 2006 on federal fraud charges. A
federal court sentenced him to 24 years in prison. He appealed his conviction to the
U.S. Supreme Court, which heard oral arguments in March 2010. On June 24, 2010,
the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the government had improperly applied a law
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.used to convict Skilling and sent the case back to a lower court. In June 2013,
Skilling was sentenced to 14 years in prison. He was released from jail in 2019. 10
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Why Is Accurate Financial Reporting
Important?
Enron was one of many large corporate scandals in the early 2000s that shook
investor confidence in the U.S. economy. Because of the scope of the fraud and the
damage to Enron investors, the U.S. Congress held numerous hearings and
committee meetings related to the aftermath of the scandal. 11 Enron significantly
misstated its financial condition in the financial statements that it filed with the SEC,
leading its investors to lose money because of these fraudulent financial statements.
The Enron scandal showed why accurate financial information is important.
Enron was able to sustain itself for at least 5 years because of inaccurate financial
reporting. During this period, financial analysts continued to recommend its stock as
a good investment. The public and Enron employees invested in it. However, these
people had significant losses when Enron’s troubles became public and the
company finally declared bankruptcy. Enron duped its investors. By the time
everyone knew the truth, it was too late to recover investment losses. Investors thus
lost confidence in large public companies.
The financial statements that a company files with the SEC are among the main
sources of information that investors use to research that company. These
documents help investors determine the true financial condition of a company. After
the Enron scandal, the SEC required more information to be reported on these
forms. It also required that the accuracy of these forms be certified in several
different ways.
Public companies are required to file several financial disclosure statements with
the SEC. These forms help investors understand the financial stability of a company.
The most commonly filed forms are:
Form 10-K—Annual report
Form 10-Q—Quarterly report
Form 8-K—Current report
A company uses Form 10-K to file its annual report. Federal law requires that
publicly traded companies submit these reports each year. Depending on their size,
companies must file this report within 60 to 90 days after the end of their fiscal year.
The larger a company is, the faster it has to file its report.
Form 10-K is a very detailed disclosure of a company’s financial condition. A
company must fully describe its business in its 10-K disclosure, explain how it is
organized and how it operates, and provide its financial statements. These
statements include balance sheets, statements of income and cash flows, and
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.statements of shareholder equity. An independent auditor must audit the company’s
financial statements, and the auditor’s report must be included in the Form 10-K
filing. In addition, the CEO and CFO of a company, as well as the majority of the
company’s board of directors, must sign the company’s Form 10-K.
Form 10-Q is a company’s quarterly report, which is required by federal law.
Companies must file these reports after the end of each of their first three quarters in
a fiscal year. These reports are usually less detailed than the end-of-the year 10-K
filing. Depending on their size, companies must file this report within 40 to 45 days
after the end of each fiscal quarter.
Companies must file Form 8-K if they experience a major event that could affect
their financial condition, because shareholders and investors should know about
these events. Companies must file a Form 8-K with the SEC within 4 days of a major
event. 12 This period is shortened in some instances. For example, a company must
file Form 8-K with the SEC immediately if it becomes aware of insider trading
activities.
FYI
A company’s two main financial documents are its balance sheet and profit and loss statement. The
balance sheet provides a summary of the company’s financial condition at a certain period. This is
commonly prepared on a monthly basis. A profit and loss statement is used to determine whether a
company made a profit during a certain period.
General events that trigger a Form 8-K disclosure requirement include:
Filing for bankruptcy
Selling off significant assets
Acquiring another company
Getting a loan
Board member resignation
Board member elections
Any changes to board governance documents
People need accurate financial information so that they can invest wisely and make
money. Therefore, the SEC recommends that potential investors carefully review a
company’s prospectus and financial reports. You can read the SEC’s list of
information that investors should review before investing at http://www.investor.gov.
The benefit of reviewing information from several different sources is that an investor
can get a better picture of a company’s financial condition.
It can be very hard for investors to detect fraud, as was the case in the Enron
scandal. Therefore, the SEC recommends that investors look for potential red flags
as they review a company’s financial condition. Red flags include companies that
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.have high-value assets, but low revenues. It also includes odd items listed in the
footnotes of the company’s financial statements. Both of these red flags were
present in the Enron scandal.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
Congress passed the Public Company Accounting Reform and Investor Protection
Act in 2002. 13 More commonly known as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, it is called
SOX or Sarbox in many resources. The Act was named after its sponsors, Senator
Paul Sarbanes of Maryland and Representative Michael Oxley of Ohio. It was
passed in response to corporate scandals such as Enron, WorldCom, and Adelphia.
SOX proposed extensive changes to the Securities Act of 1933 and the Securities
Exchange Act of 1934.
SOX moved through both the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate at a
quick pace. It was originally introduced in the U.S. House of Representatives in
February 2002, just months after the Enron scandal became public. On July 25,
2002, both the House and Senate voted on the final version of SOX. President
George W. Bush then signed SOX into law on July 30, 2002. As he signed it, he
called SOX “the most far-reaching reforms of American business practices since the
time of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.” 14
Purpose and Scope
Congress hoped that SOX reforms would prevent another Enron scandal. The main
goal of SOX was to protect shareholders and investors from financial fraud. SOX
increased corporate disclosure requirements and created strict penalties for
violations of its provisions. SOX has 11 different titles. They are:
NOTE
A company uses a prospectus to describe the securities that it offers for sale. The prospectus describes
the company’s business plan.
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (Title I)—Establishes the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). The PCAOB oversees the firms
that audit public companies.
Auditor Independence (Title II)—Forbids auditors from providing some types of
non-audit services to their clients.
Corporate Responsibility (Title III)—Requires corporations to create audit
committees on their board of directors. The audit committee is responsible for
hiring the corporation’s outside auditors.
Enhanced Financial Disclosures (Title IV)—Enhances the amount of
information that public companies must provide on their SEC filings. This section
requires companies to report on internal controls that affect their financial reports.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Analyst Conflicts of Interest (Title V)—Establishes rules to make sure that
securities analysts can give independent opinions about a public company’s stock
risk.
Commission Resources and Authority (Title VI)—Gives the SEC authority to
discipline investment firms for unprofessional conduct. This section also gives the
SEC additional funding to support its programs.
Studies and Reports (Title VII)—Requires the SEC to review public accounting
firms. The SEC must do this at least every 3 years. This section also requires the
SEC to issue reports about how the securities market operates.
Corporate and Criminal Fraud Accountability (Title VIII)—Imposes document
retention requirements on companies and auditors. It protects whistleblowers, and
also bans retaliation against employees who participate in fraud investigations.
This section also imposes criminal penalties for violating SOX.
White-Collar Crime Penalty Enhancements (Title IX)—Requires CEOs and
CFOs to certify that the company’s financial reports fairly represent its financial
condition. It creates criminal penalties for signing fraudulent statements.
Corporate Tax Returns (Title X)—Is a statement from Congress that strongly
suggests that a CEO sign the federal income tax return of a corporation.
Corporate Fraud and Accountability (Title XI)—Establishes criminal liability for
certain types of fraud committed by corporate officers. It also increases penalties
for some types of corporate crime.
SOX supplements current federal securities laws. It applies to publicly traded
companies that must register with the SEC. This includes international companies
that trade stock on U.S. stock exchanges. However, SOX does not apply to privately
held companies.
NOTE
A small public company is a company with less than $75 million of public stock.
Main Requirements
SOX is a very detailed act with many provisions. This chapter focuses on the parts of
the act that have had the most impact on information technology (IT) functions.
When SOX was first enacted, many companies assumed that it did not have any IT
components. Congress did not mention IT anywhere within the act.
This opinion changed as companies began to review their SOX compliance
requirements. Many SOX provisions require companies to verify the accuracy of
their financial information. Because IT systems hold many types of financial
information, companies and auditors quickly realized that these systems were in
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.scope for SOX compliance. That meant that how those systems are used and the
controls used to safeguard those systems had to be reviewed.
The relationship between IT and SOX compliance continues to evolve. This
section reviews the SOX provisions that have an IT impact. First, this section
reviews the PCAOB, which creates standards that auditors must follow when
reviewing the activities of public companies. These standards help auditors
determine the IT controls that they must review. The creation of the PCAOB is one of
the most notable SOX reforms.
Second, this section reviews SOX provisions that impact records management
functions. These provisions have an impact on IT operations because of the vast
amount of data that is stored electronically. These provisions are important because
they affect how IT systems are configured.
Finally, SOX requires the executive management of a company to certify that
there are controls in place to protect the accuracy of company information. This is
the area where SOX compliance has caused the biggest challenge for companies
and IT professionals.
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
Before the creation of SOX, auditors and accountants belonged to a self-regulating
profession. A profession is self-regulating when it creates and enforces its own rules
of conduct. Federal and state laws place few oversight requirements on members of
self-regulating professions.
An attorney is a common example of a member of a self-regulating profession.
Attorneys must meet minimum state law requirements to become licensed. After
that, their professional behavior is largely judged by commissions made up of other
attorneys who enforce rules of professional conduct. The profession itself
determines what these rules of professional conduct should be.
FYI
Information security professionals belong to a largely self-regulating profession. This is especially true
when information security professionals obtain certifications that require the certificate holders to follow a
code of conduct.
The Enron scandal proved that self-regulation does have some drawbacks.
Enron’s accounting firm, Arthur Andersen, provided it with accounting, auditing, and
consulting services. Enron was a large Andersen client that paid Andersen $52
million for auditing and consulting services in 2001. 15 Even the Powers Report noted
that there was a lack of critical advice from its auditors at Arthur Andersen in
reviewing Enron’s publicly filed financial statements. 16 This may have been because
Arthur Andersen was reluctant to challenge such an important client.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Congress created the PCAOB to provide a layer of government oversight on
auditing activities. The PCAOB, which oversees the audit of public companies, was
created in order to ensure that audit reports for public companies are fair and
independent. Under SOX, the PCAOB has several duties. 17 It must:
Register accounting firms that prepare audit reports for public companies.
Establish standards for the preparation of audit reports.
Conduct inspections of registered public accounting firms.
Conduct investigations and disciplinary proceedings against registered public
accounting firms.
Perform other duties or functions necessary to carry out SOX.
Enforce SOX compliance.
Set a budget for the PCAOB, and manage its operations.
The PCAOB has five members. The SEC selects these members and appoints them
to staggered terms. The SEC can remove PCAOB members if needed. PCAOB
members are to be “individuals of integrity and reputation who have a demonstrated
commitment to the interests of investors and the public.” 18 They must be financially
literate. This means that they must be able to understand financial statements. Only
two members of the PCAOB are allowed to be certified public accountants (CPAs);
the remaining three members cannot. Furthermore, members of the PCAOB are not
allowed to have any financial interest in an accounting firm. FIGURE 7-1 shows the
structure of the PCAOB.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.FIGURE 7-1
PCAOB structure.
NOTE
You can learn more about the role of the PCAOB by visiting its webpage at http://pcaobus.org.
FYI
The SEC believes that a single set of globally accepted accounting principles will benefit U.S. companies.
Therefore, it is evaluating whether it should adopt the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS),
created by the International Accounting Standards Board. You can learn about IFRS at
http://www.ifrs.com/ifrs_faqs.html. The SEC has studied the IFRS extensively and compared them with
U.S. accounting principles. Although the SEC has not approved IFRS for use by U.S. public companies,
interest in a global framework for financial reporting remains. 19
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.One of the main functions of the PCAOB is to set standards for how auditors
review public companies. It has created standards related to auditing, ethics and
independence, quality control, and attestation, which must be approved by the SEC.
The PCAOB bases many of its standards on GAAP, the principles established by the
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). The SEC has recognized GAAP as
authoritative and requires financial statements to be prepared in accordance with
GAAP.
The PCAOB’s Auditing Standard 2201 provides guidance on how an auditor
performs an audit of a company’s internal controls over financial reporting (ICFR).
This standard addresses how to audit controls applied to a company’s IT systems
and processes where those systems and processes impact the production of the
company’s financial reports. The standard specifies a top-down approach that might
limit the scope of review of IT systems. The standard also recommends that auditors
focus their review on areas of the highest risk. In 2019, the PCAOB reported that
auditors need to be aware of cybersecurity incidents at the companies that they
audit. This is because the integrity of the data generated by the company’s IT
systems could be compromised by a cybersecurity incident. If the data generated or
processed by the IT systems is not accurate, then the company’s financial
statements could contain errors. 20
Document Retention
SOX contains some records retention provisions. It is important to know about them
because companies store many of their records electronically; in fact, some studies
estimate that 93 percent of all business documents are created and stored
electronically. 22 Companies must understand how their IT systems work in order to
meet SOX retention requirements.
NOTE
At the end of 2019 there were over 7,000 U.S. public companies. The market value of their stock was over
$45 trillion. 21
SOX requires auditors and public companies to maintain audit papers for 7
years. 23 Audit papers are documents used in an audit that support the conclusions
made in an audit report. SOX takes a very broad view of the type of records that
must be saved. This includes work papers, memoranda, and correspondence. It also
includes any other records created, sent, or received in connection with the audit.
SOX also includes electronic records.
SOX also requires that a public company retain the records and documentation
that it uses to assess its ICFR. These controls are discussed in the next section.
Guidance issued by the SEC recognizes that this documentation takes several
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.different forms, as well as electronic data. Companies must permanently retain this
information.
Is the PCAOB Constitutional?
The constitutionality of SOX was challenged soon after it was enacted into law in a case called Free
Enterprise Fund and Beckstead and Watts v. Public Company Accounting Oversight Board.
The Free Enterprise Fund and Beckstead and Watts LLP filed the case in 2006. The Free Enterprise Fund is
a public interest organization, whereas Beckstead and Watts LLP was an accounting firm. The plaintiffs
argued that SOX is unconstitutional. In particular, they argued that the PCAOB is unconstitutional because its
creation and operation violate the constitutional separation of powers doctrine.
The plaintiffs argued that separation of powers is violated because the PCAOB is an executive branch
agency that the president has virtually no control over. Under SOX, the SEC alone has the power to appoint
PCAOB members. In addition, PCAOB members can be fired only for cause, and only by the SEC. The
president, and even the SEC, has little authority to control PCAOB members once they are appointed.
The plaintiffs argued that it violates the section of the Constitution that gives the president the power to
appoint and remove officers of the executive branch. They also argued that under the Constitution, Congress
is not permitted to set up a structure that bypasses the president’s authority.
The case was filed in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. The District Court granted summary
judgment for the PCAOB and upheld the constitutionality of SOX. In August 2008, the Circuit Court for the
D.C. Circuit affirmed the decision of the lower court. The U.S. Supreme Court heard arguments in the case
on December 7, 2009, and issued its decision in June 2010.
In its decision, the Court found that the way that the PCAOB is created does indeed violate the separation of
powers doctrine. Even though the portion of SOX that creates the PCAOB is unconstitutional, however, the
Court said that SOX is still good law. It also said that the PCAOB could continue to function. The Court’s
decision means that the SEC can now fire PCAOB members at will (or for any reason at all), instead of just
for good cause.
You can view the Supreme Court’s decision on the Free Enterprise case at
https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/09pdf/08-861.pdf.
In 2010, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act expanded the role of the PCAOB.
The Act gave the PCAOB additional oversight of the audits of brokers and dealers. It also gave the PCAOB
the power to conduct inspections, bring enforcement action, and set standards. 24
FYI
Many federal and state laws contain records retention requirements. SOX is another law to add to that list.
Organizations should develop document retention policies to help them track their different obligations.
The penalties for failing to retain records for the right amount of time can be
severe. SOX makes it a crime for a person or company to knowingly and willfully
violate its records retention provisions. A person who violates this provision can face
fines and serve up to 10 years in prison.
SOX also makes it a crime for any person to tamper with or destroy any record in
an attempt to interfere with a federal investigation. 25 Unlike other parts of SOX, this
provision applies to any organization. Private companies also must follow it. People
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.who violate this section can face fines of up to $10 million, as well as up to 20 years
in prison.
Companies must make sure that electronic records are stored properly so that
they can satisfy SOX retention requirements. They must store the records for the
right amount of time. They also must make sure that those records are destroyed
properly when the retention period expires.
Certification
SOX requires companies to report accurate financial data to protect their investors
from harm. To encourage a company to report accurate data, SOX requires its CEO
and CFO to certify the company’s SEC filings. SOX certification provisions require
executives to establish, maintain, and review certain types of internal controls for
their company.
Disclosure Controls. SOX Section 302 requires CEOs and CFOs to certify a
company’s SEC reports. The purpose of the certifications is to put executive
management on notice of the company’s financial condition. The SEC can hold a
CEO or CFO liable for submitting inaccurate financial reports. It makes sense that
both the CEO and CFO would have to make these certifications as they are the
officers who are most knowledgeable about the company’s finances and overall
condition.
A certification attests to the truth of certain facts. The SEC requires a certification
to be included on several different forms, such as a company’s Form 10-Q and Form
10-K reports. (These certifications do not need to be included on Form 8-K.) Under
the law, 26 a CEO and CFO each must certify that: 27
They have reviewed the report.
The report does not contain untrue or misleading statements about the company.
The financial statements fairly represent the company’s financial condition.
The executive is responsible for creating disclosure controls and procedures that
are designed to bring material information about the company to the executive’s
attention, and the controls are reviewed 90 days before filing the report.
The executive has disclosed all significant deficiencies in its internal controls to
their auditor.
Whether any significant changes in the internal controls have occurred since they
were last evaluated.
The controls required under Section 302, called disclosure controls, are very
broad. They are the processes and procedures that a company puts in place to
make sure that it makes timely disclosures to the SEC. They are how management
stays informed about the company’s operations. These controls must address any
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.change in information that affects company resources. They bring events to the
executive’s attention so that they can be reported to the SEC.
Disclosure controls are different from SOX internal controls. Internal controls
are the processes and procedures that a company uses to provide reasonable
assurance that its financial reports are reliable. The next section reviews these
controls. Internal controls address only processes that protect the reliability of
financial reports, whereas disclosure controls are broader. They include internal
controls. 28 FIGURE 7-2 shows the relationship between disclosure controls and
internal controls.
FIGURE 7-2
Relationship between disclosure controls and internal controls.
SOX Section 906 imposes criminal liability for fraudulent certifications. Under this
section, CEOs and CFOs who knowingly certify fraudulent reports may be fined up
to $1 million. They also could be imprisoned for up to 10 years. An officer who
willfully makes a fraudulent certification may be fined up to $5 million and could be
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.imprisoned up to 20 years. 29
Internal Controls. SOX Section 404 requires a company’s executive management
to report on the effectiveness of the company’s ICFR. 30 They must make this report
each year on their Form 10-K filing. Under this section, management must create,
document, and test ICFR. After management makes its yearly report on its ICFR,
outside auditors must review the report and verify that the ICFR work. This section
has caused compliance headaches for IT professionals.
Under SEC rules, ICFR are processes that provide reasonable assurance that
financial reports are reliable. 31 ICFR provide management with reasonable
assurance that:
Financial reports, records, and data are accurately maintained.
Transactions are prepared according to GAAP rules and are properly recorded.
Unauthorized acquisition or use of data or assets that could affect financial
statements will be prevented or detected in a timely manner.
SOX does not define reasonable assurance. The SEC and PCAOB recognize that
reasonable assurance does not mean absolute assurance. 32 However, it is a high
level of assurance that satisfies management that ICFR are effective. Management
must be confident that these controls protect financial reporting mechanisms.
NOTE
SOX has no specific requirements that cybersecurity risks and incidents must be disclosed. However, the
SEC has issued guidance that an organization may need to disclose any cybersecurity risks and incidents
in order to ensure that its other required disclosures are not misleading. 34 For example, it must disclose its
cybersecurity risks if those risks would make investment in the organization risky.
The SEC requires that management use evaluation criteria established by
recognized experts to review the company’s ICFR and help ensure that they are
effective. The SEC has recognized only one specific framework that meets its
requirements: the COSO Framework. The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
(COSO) of the Treadway Commission first created its “Internal Control—Integrated
Framework” in 1992. The framework, commonly called the “COSO Framework,” was
revised in 2013. Many U.S. businesses use this framework to assess their internal
control systems. 33
What Is COSO?
COSO was established in 1985 to identify factors that contributed to fraudulent financial reporting. Five U.S.
financial organizations sponsored COSO: the American Accounting Association, the American Institute of
Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), Financial Executives International, the Institute of Internal Auditors
(IIA), and the Institute of Management Accountants. COSO is a nonprofit organization.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Since 1987, COSO has recognized the need for the creation of ICFR. It released its first guidance on internal
controls, called the “COSO Internal Control—Integrated Framework,” in 1992. The COSO framework says
that internal controls are effective when they give the management of a company reasonable assurance that:
It understands how the entity’s operational objectives are being achieved.
Its published financial statements are being prepared reliably.
It is complying with applicable laws and regulations.
The COSO Framework was updated in 2013 because the business environment has grown more complex
since the framework was initially issued. One of the primary contributors to this complexity is the use of IT in
business.
The COSO Framework has five components that organizations can use to review their IT profile. They are:
Control environment—This is the organization’s culture. Control environment factors include
management philosophy and the competence of the organization’s people. The control environment
sets the foundation for the other components of the framework. With reference to IT, the organization
should understand how technology is used within the business.
Risk assessment—This refers to the identification and review of risks that are internal and external to
the organization. Does the organization understand the risks to its technology environment?
Control activities—This refers to how policies and procedures are followed throughout the
organization. Has the organization implemented information security controls to mitigate the risks to its
technology environment?
Information and communication—This addresses how an organization communicates information
internally to its employees, how an organization communicates to external parties, and how information
systems store and generate data. Does the organization have mechanisms for communicating about
risks and potential information security events that impact the organization’s systems?
Monitoring—This refers to how the organization monitors its internal control systems. Does the
organization monitor its information security controls and update them when needed?
You can learn more about COSO’s “Internal Control—Integrated Framework” by visiting its website:
https://www.coso.org/Pages/default.aspx.
SOX Section 404 compliance is not easy. It is very general about the types of
ICFR that companies must implement. It does not give a good definition for ICFR
generally, and it does not address IT controls at all. In 2007, the SEC issued
additional guidance to help companies assess ICFR during their Section 404 review
in response to many complaints about the large scope of a Section 404 review.
Many of these complaints focused on how to address IT controls.
The SEC stated two broad principles in its guidance:
Management should assess how its internal controls prevent or detect significant
deficiencies in financial statements.
Management should perform a risk-based review of the effectiveness of these
controls.
The SEC also said that management must exercise its professional judgment to limit
the scope of a Section 404 review. It reminded companies that SOX applies to
internal controls, including IT controls, that affect financial reporting only. 35
Management must review general IT controls to make sure that IT systems
operate properly and consistently. The controls must provide management with
reasonable assurance that IT systems operate properly to protect financial reporting.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.TABLE 7-1 shows how the goals of ICFR match up with information security goals.
TABLE 7-1 Internal Controls and Information Security Goals
STEPS TAKEN TO MEET INTERNAL CONTROLS
INFORMATION SECURITY GOALS
Financial reports, records, and data are accurately
maintained. Integrity
Transactions are prepared according to GAAP rules
and properly recorded. Integrity, availability
Unauthorized acquisition or use of data or assets
that could affect financial statements will be
prevented or detected in a timely manner. Confidentiality, integrity, availability
It is clear today that management’s review of an organization’s ICFR must
include a review of IT controls as well. Although the COSO Framework does not
specifically address the types of IT controls that an organization should implement, it
issues guidance on how to address IT risk. Organizations use many approaches to
evaluate their IT controls. Some organizations follow the Guide to Assessment of IT
Risk (GAIT) framework. Others use “Control Objectives for Information and Related
Technology” (COBIT). Both of these frameworks appear to meet the SEC’s
requirements for a suitable evaluation framework.
Some companies outsource their IT functions; however, a company cannot
escape SOX Section 404 liability by outsourcing financial functions. SOX requires
companies to monitor ICFR for outsourced operations as well. Many companies do
this by asking their outsourcing companies to provide them with a System and
Organization Controls (SOC) report.
NOTE
SOX does not specify the IT controls that companies need to implement. Instead, companies must
determine the best controls for their own systems.
Created by the AICPA, SOC audits review a service organization’s control
activities related to the services that it provides to its customers. These audits review
the IT controls on the outsourced service. A SOC audit helps a service organization
show that it has proper safeguards in place to protect its customer’s data.
There are three levels of SOC reports:
SOC 1—Report on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to User Entities’
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. These reports are used by auditors to
assess the ICFR at one entity that does business with another entity. There are
two types of SOC 1 reports that can be created. These reports are generally only
shared between the organizations that are doing business with one another.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.SOC 2— Report on Controls at a Service Organization Relevant to Security,
Availability, Processing Integrity, Confidentiality, or Privacy. These reports are used
by an entity to demonstrate to potential customers that it has good information
security practices. These reports specifically address security, availability,
processing integrity, confidentiality, and privacy. They also address corporate
governance and risk management processes. There are two types of SOC 2
reports that can be created. These reports may be shared with potential
customers, usually under a confidentiality agreement so the information in the
report is kept private.
SOC 3—Trust Services Report for Service Organizations. These reports are
similar to SOC 2 reports. However, they do not contain the same level of detail
regarding information system operations. These reports only contain the auditor’s
assessment of whether or not the outsourced functions meet certain control
objectives. They do not contain details about those functions. These reports may
be widely shared with potential customers. 36
NOTE
In 2017, the AICPA created the SOC for Cybersecurity. This framework helps an organization assess its
own cybersecurity risk management program and helps the organization report on the effectiveness of its
controls for information security.
Many companies may ask a service provider to share its SOC 2 or SOC 3 report
before entering into an outsourcing relationship. Many service organizations have
these reports prepared in advance so that they can respond quickly to a customer
request.
Oversight
The SEC oversees most SOX provisions. The mission of the SEC, which was
created under the Securities and Exchange Act of 1934, is to protect investors and
maintain the integrity of the securities industry.
The SEC has five commissioners, all appointed by the U.S. president, who each
serve for 5-year terms. No more than three of the commissioners may belong to the
same political party. The SEC has 11 regional offices in the United States. 37
SOX gives the SEC specific duties. For example, the SEC is required to
designate the members of the PCAOB. It is also required to review various
operations of public companies to make sure that they are following SOX.
SOX requires the SEC to review a public company’s Form 10-K and Form 10-Q
reports at least once every 3 years. 38 It must do this to try to detect fraud and
inaccurate financial statements that could harm the investing public. The SEC has
discretion in deciding how often to review companies. SOX states the factors that the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.SEC should consider when deciding to conduct a review. Under SOX, the SEC must
consider:
Whether a company has amended its financial reports
Whether a company’s stock price fluctuates significantly when compared with
other companies
How much stock the company has issued
The difference between a company’s stock price and its earnings
Whether a company is large and affects a particular sector of the economy
Any other factor that the SEC considers relevant
The SEC also enforces SOX compliance. It has the power to investigate and
sanction public companies that do not comply with SOX.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Compliance and Security Controls
Assessing ICFR in IT systems can be difficult. IT professionals have several different
frameworks that they can use for reviewing IT controls, some of which you are
already familiar with. Many of these frameworks help companies decide which
controls to implement.
COBIT
In 1996, the Information Systems Audit and Control Association (ISACA) released
the first version of “Control Objectives for Information and Related Technology”
(COBIT). Several versions of COBIT have been released. Even though ISACA has
moved away from use of the term control objective in its framework, it has kept the
popular term COBIT for the name of the framework. The most recent version of
COBIT was released in 2019. 39
The COBIT 2019 framework aims to help organizations create value from their IT
assets. 40 COBIT also provides a framework for the governance and management of
those assets. It has six key principles:
Providing stakeholder value
Adopting a holistic approach
Understanding that governance is dynamic
Separating governance from management
Tailoring governance to the organization’s needs
Covering the whole organization
COBIT 2019 does not state specific actions that an organization must take to build
an IT governance framework. Instead, it provides a list of processes and practices
that an organization should review. It has 40 governance and management
objectives. This list provides organizations with a method for making their own
decisions about technology governance and management. It is technology neutral,
and also general enough that any type of organization, profit or nonprofit, can use
the framework.
Similar to earlier versions, COBIT 2019 refers to the COSO Framework. You can
learn more about COBIT at http://www.isaca.org.
GAIT
The IIA created the GAIT series in January 2007. The IIA first created the GAIT
methodology to help auditors and companies comply with SOX Section 404, as well
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.as help identify controls where a failure might cause an error in a financial statement.
GAIT was most recently updated in 2009.
The GAIT methodology helps auditors and companies scope Section 404
reviews of IT controls. It realizes that companies must implement ICFR in IT
systems. Similar to the SEC and PCAOB, GAIT advocates a top-down, risk-based
approach to review IT controls. GAIT has four main principles:
A top-down approach should be used to review risks and IT controls.
The review of risks and IT controls should be limited to financially significant
systems, applications, or data.
IT controls and risks exist at various layers in an IT system (application, database,
operating system, and network infrastructure).
IT processes should be mitigated by IT control objectives, not individual controls.
FYI
The words framework and methodology are often used interchangeably. However, they are actually
different things. A framework is a loose structure that guides an organization toward a particular goal. A
framework is intended to be flexible. A methodology, by contrast, is a set of defined principles and
practices that lead toward a particular goal. A methodology is intended to be inclusive of all tasks needed
to accomplish a goal. A framework is flexible and can actually embed multiple practices and
methodologies.
Similar to COBIT, GAIT does not recommend individual controls. Instead, it specifies
a series of control objectives. Companies are free to choose the individual controls
that meet the control objectives. Information security objectives are included in the
GAIT guidance to the extent that they scope to systems that impact a company’s
financial reports. The IIA has also issued several practice guides that address
current topics in IT and information security.
You can learn more about GAIT at https://na.theiia.org/standards-
guidance/recommended-guidance/practice-guides/Pages/GAIT-Methodology.aspx.
ISO/IEC Standards
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) have created two standards that companies can
use to implement information security controls. The two standards work together:
One guides information security governance, whereas the other reviews how to
implement security controls. The standards are:
ISO/IEC 27001:2013, “Information Technology—Security Techniques—Information
Security Management Systems—Requirements”
ISO/IEC 27002:2013, “Information Technology—Security Techniques—Code of
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Practice for Information Security Controls”
ISO/IEC 27001 provides a framework for creating an information security
management system. It uses a risk-based approach to review how information
security is managed within an organization, and reviews the processes that
management teams must consider to operate, monitor, review, and maintain IT
systems.
ISO/IEC 27002 lists information security safeguards. Unlike COBIT and GAIT,
ISO/IEC 27002 does describe specific controls. It has 14 major sections, with each
section reviewing a different category of information security controls. The standard
explains why organizations should use the listed controls. It also explains how to use
the controls. The 14 sections are:
Information security policy
Information security organization
Human resources security
Asset management
Asset control
Cryptography
Physical and environmental security
Operations security
Communications security
Information system acquisition, development, and maintenance
Supplier relationships
Information security incident management
Information security business continuity management
Compliance
The ISO/IEC standards are specific to information security. Companies can use
these standards to make sure that their information security practices provide
reasonable assurance that ICFR are effective. See Table 7-1 for the relationship
between SOX internal controls and information security goals.
NIST Computer Security Guidance
Finally, some organizations turn to the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) for information security control guidance. NIST creates
information security guidance for federal agencies. These agencies must comply
with Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA).
NOTE
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.NIST is currently updating SP 800-53 (Rev. 4). As of the writing of this chapter, the final public draft of SP
800-53 (Rev. 5) had been released for final public comment. The update integrates both information
security and privacy controls. It is intended to provide a comprehensive approach for safeguarding new
technologies.
Many nongovernmental organizations also use NIST publications to guide their
own information security programs. “NIST Special Publication 800-53 (Rev. 4),
Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations”
states the minimum security controls that organizations should use to create an
effective information security program.
You can learn more about NIST computer security resources at
http://csrc.nist.gov/. SOX does not provide public companies with specific advice on
how to use IT controls. Many organizations use the frameworks reviewed in this
chapter to guide their SOX Section 404 compliance activities.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.SOX Influence in Other Types of Companies
With few exceptions, SOX applies only to public companies. However, many
different types of organizations have been affected by SOX. This is because SOX
promotes good corporate governance practices. Many of these principles make
sense for other organizations as well.
In addition to the certification provisions discussed earlier, SOX governance
provisions include:
Independent directors—SOX requires a public company to create an
independent board of directors. Directors are independent when they do not have
financial ties to the company. In some cases, the independence rules extend to
members of the director’s immediate family.
Audit committee—SOX requires public companies to have an audit committee on
their board of directors. This committee works with outside auditors to make sure
that financial reports are accurate.
Conflicts of interest—SOX requires executives to disclose certain types of
conflicts of interest
A private company might implement SOX controls because it hopes to become a
public company someday. Following SOX principles will make the transition from
private to public easier. If a private company follows SOX principles, it might be in a
better position to attract investors, as it will have processes in place that allow
investors to review the company’s financial condition. Investors will be more likely to
invest in companies that show financial transparency.
Nonprofit organizations also have an incentive to follow SOX. Good governance
in a nonprofit organization is very important. Nonprofits depend on grants from other
entities to support their operations. They also depend on individual donations.
People will not contribute to nonprofits that are not managed well. Nonprofits that
adopt SOX governance principles can prove that they have controls in place to
properly manage the organization and its finances. A reputation for good governance
also will encourage more donations.
In some ways, SOX compliance has become synonymous with good
governance. Companies that follow SOX practices prove that they have controls in
place to prevent and detect wrongdoing. This can be important if a company is
involved in litigation about bad governance practices. A plaintiff’s lawyer will surely
point out if a board did not follow SOX good governance practices. It will not matter
whether the company was required by law to follow SOX or not. Because SOX is a
best practice that many companies follow, the implication that a company did not
follow SOX can be damaging.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Corporate Privacy Issues
Corporate information privacy covers several issues. Because companies have a
number of different kinds of records, they must approach privacy from many angles.
The three major corporate privacy concerns are:
Privacy of employee data
Privacy of customer data
Privacy of corporate data
In general, employees have no expectation of privacy in their workplaces. In most
cases, this means that employers can monitor an employee’s work activities, as well
as telephone and email conversations. Employers can also monitor employee
internet access and computer use. In most cases, it is best if employers give their
employees notice that they are monitoring employees in this way.
Employers also can monitor employee workspaces and offices. They can use
closed circuit television (CCTV) or other video tools to do this. Similar to other types
of monitoring, it is best if the employer gives notice about the monitoring. Although
the ability to monitor is broad, employers usually cannot monitor locations such as
bathrooms, locker rooms, and employee lounges. Some courts have held that
employees do have a reasonable expectation of privacy in these areas.
NOTE
A nonprofit organization does not distribute its profits to owners or shareholders. Instead, it puts its profits
back into the organization to help pursue its goals. Many charities are nonprofit organizations.
Companies must protect certain types of information belonging to their
employees. For example, if a company provides an employee health plan, it must
keep some information private. The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) requires companies to protect some information about employee health
plans. A company with an on-site health clinic must protect employee medical
records under HIPAA and state laws.
Companies also must protect customer data. Some companies must protect
consumer information in special ways. For example, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
(GLBA) requires companies to protect consumer financial information. Some states
also have laws that require companies to protect the personally identifiable
information (PII) of their customers. If the company suffers a security breach that
compromises PII, then it must inform its customers about the breach. The purpose of
these laws, called data breach notification laws, is to help protect people from
identity theft.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Finally, companies have their own internal records to protect. These records may
contain data about the company’s organization, finances, human resources, and
legal matters. In general, a company’s directors and officers always have the ability
to see all company records. In a small company, the owner has this right. They also
can enter employee offices to review records. They have the ability to do this in the
regular course of business because they are responsible for the business and its
successful operation.
In corporations, the directors of a company have an absolute right to be able to
inspect the company’s records. Shareholders also have a right to inspect corporate
records. However, the shareholder’s inspection right is not as broad as a director’s
right. In most states, shareholders have a right to inspect some records during
regular business hours. They must make a written request to inspect corporate
records that must include the shareholders’ reason for wanting to review the records.
Companies also have records regarding their products and services that they
must protect. Some of these records might be trade secrets, information about
company products or services that helps one company compete against another
company. Trade secrets are a form of intellectual property; therefore, a company
must protect its trade secret information. If a company properly protects this kind of
information, it is entitled to legal protection.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.Case Studies and Examples
Investors can learn about a company’s financial information from many different
places. One place to learn information is from the SEC’s Electronic Data Gathering
and Retrieval (EDGAR) database. All public companies that are required to register
with the SEC file their required reports through EDGAR.
You can search for a public company’s filings on EDGAR. The URL is
https://www.sec.gov/edgar/search-and-access. Pick a public company and try to
search for it on EDGAR. Good companies to search include Microsoft Corp., Apple
Inc., Starbucks Corp., Zoom Video Communications, and the Walt Disney Company.
Look at the company’s most recent Form 10-K report. Item 9A is the SOX Section
404 report on internal controls. What do these sections tell you? What can you learn
about the company that you have searched? You can learn more about how to read
these forms at https://www.sec.gov/fast-answers/answersreada10khtm.html.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.CHAPTER SUMMARY
Congress created the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in response to scandal. It passed
SOX to help improve investor confidence in publicly traded companies. SOX
places rules on public companies and other organizations that promote
trustworthy financial reports. The scope of SOX extends to any public
company functions or processes that impact financial reporting. The scope of
SOX within a company is very broad. SOX requires that companies review
many IT processes to make sure that they are trustworthy.
The scope of SOX is broad. Its influence extends even to organizations that
are not required to follow it. For example, private companies and nonprofit
organizations may choose to follow SOX to show their commitment to good
governance.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Disclosure controls
Dividend
Form 8-K
Form 10-K
Form 10-Q
Internal controls
Privately held company
Public company
Securities
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.CHAPTER 7 ASSESSMENT
1. What types of companies must follow all Sarbanes-Oxley Act provisions?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Public
Private
Nonprofit
Governmental
None of these is correct.
2. A dividend is a shareholder’s earnings in a company.
A. True
B. False
3. What is the main goal of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act?
4. How many days after a major event must a company file Form 8-K?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Two
Three
Four
Five
None of these is correct.
5. Which corporate scandals led to the creation of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Enron
WorldCom
Adelphia
Tyco
All of these are correct.
6. What are internal controls over financial reporting (ICFR)?
7. How many members of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board may
be certified public accountants?
A.
B.
C.
D.
Five
Four
Three
Two
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.E. None of these is correct.
8. Sarbanes-Oxley Act Section 404 tells organizations the types of controls that
they must implement in their IT systems to protect financial reporting.
A. True
B. False
9. Which framework has the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission official
approved as suitable evaluation criteria for internal controls?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
COBIT
COSO
GAIT
ISO/IEC
None of these is correct.
10. Which Sarbanes-Oxley Act provision causes the most concern for information
technology professionals?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Section 302
Section 309
Section 404
Section 906
None of these is correct.
11. A company’s chief information security officer and chief financial officer must
sign a Section 302 certification.
A. True
B. False
12. How often must the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission review a public
company’s Form 10-K and Form 10-Q reports?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Twice a year
Every year
Every other year
Every 3 years
Every 5 years
13. What does an ICFR do?
14. Under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, how many years must public companies keep
audit papers?
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Five
Six
Seven
Eight
None of these is correct.
15. A public company must file a Form 10-K at the end of each quarter.
A. True
B. False
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.ENDNOTES
1. Forbes, “America’s Largest Private Companies,” December 2019.
https://www.forbes.com/largest-private-companies/list/#tab:rank (accessed April
11, 2020).
2. CNN, “The Guiltiest Guys in the Room,” July 5, 2006.
http://money.cnn.com/2006/05/29/news/enron_guiltyest/index.htm (accessed
April 11, 2020).
3. Fortune, “The World’s Most Admired Companies,” October 2, 2000.
http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2000/10/02/288448/index.htm
(accessed April 11, 2020).
4. Kroger, John, “Enron, Fraud, and Securities Reform,” Colorado Law Review,
Vol. 76, Issue 1 (2005): 57.
5. Houston Chronicle, “Jury Hears Ex-Enron CEO Curse in Wall Street Call,”
February 2, 2006. https://www.chron.com/business/enron/article/Jury-hears-ex-
Enron-CEO-curse-in-Wall-Street-call-1637608.php (accessed April 11, 2020).
6. Powers, William C., “Special Investigative Committee of the Board of Directors
of Enron Corp.,” February 1, 2002.
http://i.cnn.net/cnn/2002/LAW/02/02/enron.report/powers.report.pdf (accessed
April 11, 2020).
7. The New York Times, “An Implosion on Wall Street,” November 29, 2001.
http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/29/opinion/an-implosion-on-wall-street.html
(accessed April 11, 2020).
8. Houston Business Journal, “Enron Delists Stock as Financial Woes Continue,”
January 18, 2002.
http://www.bizjournals.com/houston/stories/2002/01/21/story3.html (accessed
April 11, 2020).
9. CNN, “401(k) Investors Sue Enron,” November 26, 2001.
http://money.cnn.com/2001/11/26/401k/q_retire_enron_re/ (accessed April 11,
2020).
10. New York Times, “Jeffrey Skilling, Former Enron Chief, Released After 12 Years
in Prison,” February 22, 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/02/22/business/enron-ceo-skilling-scandal.html
(accessed April 11, 2020).
11. Congressional Research Service, “Enron: A Select Chronology of
Congressional, Corporate, and Government Activities,” March 2003.
http://www.policyarchive.org/handle/10207/1392 (accessed April 11, 2020).
12. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “Form 8-K.”
https://www.sec.gov/fast-answers/answersform8khtm.html (accessed April 11,
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
2020).
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745 (codified as
amended in scattered sections of U.S. Code Vol. 15).
The New York Times, “Bush Signs Bill Aimed at Fraud in Corporations,” July 30,
2002. https://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/31/business/corporate-conduct-the-
president-bush-signs-bill-aimed-at-fraud-in-corporations.html (accessed April 11,
2020).
Time, “Enron: Who’s Accountable?” January 13, 2002.
http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1001636,00.html
(accessed April 11, 2020).
Powers Report, see note 6, at pp. 24–25.
U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 7211.
U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 7211.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “Work Plan for the Consideration of
Incorporating International Financial Reporting Standards Into the Financial
Reporting System for U.S. Issuers, Final Report,” July 13, 2012.
http://webapp01.ey.com.pl/EYP/WEB/eycom_download.nsf/resources/ZRG_Emerging_
(accessed April 18, 2020). See also CFA Institute, “IFRS: International Financial
Reporting Standards,” Undated.
https://www.cfainstitute.org/en/advocacy/issues/international-finance-reporting-
stds (accessed April 18, 2020).
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, Staff Preview of 2018 Inspection
Observations, May 6, 2019. https://pcaobus.org/Inspections/Documents/Staff-
Preview-2018-Inspection-Observations.pdf (accessed April 18, 2020).
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, “2019 PCAOB Annual Report,”
March 24, 2020.
https://pcaobus.org/About/Administration/Documents/Annual%20Reports/2019-
PCAOB-Annual-Report.pdf (accessed April 18, 2020).
Dlabay, L., Burrow, J. L., Business Finance. 2007, Cengage Learning, p. 339.
U.S. Code Vol. 17, sec. 210.2-06.
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, Pub.
Law. No. 111-203; 124 Stat. 1376-2223, codified as amended in scattered
sections of U.S. Code Vol. 15 (2012).
U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 1519.
U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 7241.
U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 1519.
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “Final Rule: Management’s Report
on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and Certification of Disclosure in
Exchange Act Periodic Reports,” June 5, 2003.
http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-8238.htm#iib3a (accessed April 26, 2020).
U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 1350.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.30. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 7262.
31. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “Final Rule: Management’s Report
on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting and Certification of Disclosure in
Exchange Act Periodic Reports,” June 5, 2003.
http://www.sec.gov/rules/final/33-8238.htm#iib3a (accessed April 26, 2020).
32. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “Staff Statement on Management’s
Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting,” May 16, 2005.
http://www.sec.gov/info/accountants/stafficreporting.htm (accessed April 26,
2020). See also Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, “AU Section 230:
Due Professional Care in the Performance of Work,” June 12, 2007
amendments. http://pcaobus.org/Standards/Auditing/Pages/AU230.aspx#ps-
pcaob_8b4d2389-b14e-4358-a4b2-93e6360eb378 (accessed April 26, 2020).
33. Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission,
“Guidance on Internal Control,” No date. http://www.coso.org/IC.htm (accessed
on April 26, 2020).
34. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “CF Disclosure Guidance: Topic No.
2, Cybersecurity,” October 13, 2011.
https://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2.htm (accessed
April 26, 2020).
35. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “Commission Guidance Regarding
Management’s Report on Internal Controls Over Financial Reporting,” Code of
Federal Regulations, Title 17, sec. 241. Available at:
https://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2007/33-8810.pdf (accessed April 26, 2020).
36. American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, “System and Organization
Controls: SOC Suite of Services,” No date.
https://www.aicpa.org/interestareas/frc/assuranceadvisoryservices/sorhome.html
(accessed April 26, 2020).
37. U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, “About the SEC,” November 22,
2016. https://www.sec.gov/about.shtml (accessed April 26, 2020).
38. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 7266.
39. ISACA, “COBIT 5: A Business Framework for the Governance and Management
of Enterprise IT,” 2012. http://www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/COBIT-5-
Framework-product-page.aspx (accessed December 30, 2013).
40. ISACA, “COBIT 2019: Introduction and Methodology,” 2018. Available at:
https://www.isaca.org/resources.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:46:17.
