CHAPTER
8
Federal Government Information
Security and Privacy Regulations
N A 2009 SPEECH, then U.S. President Barack Obama said that America’s digital
infrastructure is a “strategic national asset.” 1 He urged a broad plan to protect the
security and privacy of federal information systems, stating that the nation’s digital
infrastructure must be better protected. Both the federal government and private
organizations have a role to play.
I
This chapter reviews how the federal government protects its information
systems. These systems hold personal data about U.S. residents, conduct the
business of running the country, hold sensitive security data, and are used for the
nation’s defense. This chapter reviews the security and privacy laws that protect
these systems.
Chapter 8 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
What the information security challenges facing the federal
government are
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.What the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA)
does
How the federal government protects privacy in information systems
What import and export control laws are
What some case studies and examples are
Chapter 8 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the federal government’s information security challenges
Explain the main requirements under the Federal Information Security
Modernization Act
Describe the role of the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) in creating information security standards
Discuss approaches to protecting national security systems (NSSs)
Describe how the U.S. federal government protects privacy in
information systems
Review import and export control laws
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Information Security Challenges Facing the
Federal Government
In 2010, Vivek Kundra, then federal chief information officer (CIO), said that the
government’s computers are attacked millions of times each day. 2 In 2018, federal
agencies reported over 31,000 information security incidents involving federal
information technology (IT) systems. 3 That government IT systems are frequently
attacked and suffer information security incidents is not surprising. Government
computer systems hold data that is critical for government operations. They hold
data on people living in the United States, including employment, tax, and citizenship
data. They also hold data on businesses operating in the United States, as well as
data that are used to protect the United States from threats.
NOTE
You can view analytics for U.S. government websites at https://analytics.usa.gov/. At 7:00 a.m. ET on May
16, 2020, there were over 140,000 people on government webpages. The most popular websites were for
the U.S. Postal Service and Internal Revenue Service.
The government faces many of the same information security challenges that
private entities face. Federal IT systems and the data in them are attractive targets
for criminals:
Hackers stole the background investigation records from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM). The sensitive personnel files on over 21.5 million current,
former, and prospective federal employees and contractors were stolen, including
almost 5.6 million records with fingerprints. The incident led to a congressional
investigation and the resignation of some OPM leaders.
Thieves stole a laptop from a researcher’s car that belonged to the National
Institutes of Health (NIH). The laptop held the personal information of 2,500
people involved in an NIH study.
Attackers illegally accessed the USAJOBS database and stole account and
contact information. USAJOBS is the federal government’s employment website.
The government said that the thieves did not access sensitive personal
information.
The U.S. State Department warned 400 people about a computer security breach.
The attackers stole passport application information, including Social Security
numbers (SSNs). The thieves used the data to open credit card accounts.
Spies broke into the Pentagon’s computer systems. They stole data on the
Department of Defense’s Joint Strike Fighter aircraft.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Since 1987, the U.S. government has worked to protect federal IT systems. The
first law to address federal computer security was the Computer Security Act (CSA). 4
Under the CSA, every federal agency had to inventory its IT systems. Agencies also
had to create security plans for those systems and review their plans every year.
In 2002, Congress created the Federal Information Security Modernization Act
(FISMA). 5 It created FISMA, in part, because of the September 11, 2001, terrorist
attacks in New York City and Washington, DC, which highlighted the need for better
information security. FISMA recognizes that information security is crucial. It
superseded most of the CSA.
Today, the Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (FISMA 2014)
is the main law addressing federal government computer security protection. 6 FISMA
2014 largely superseded the 2002 act. In this book, FISMA refers both to FISMA
2014 and to those provisions of FISMA 2002 that were either incorporated into
FISMA 2014 or were not changed.
What Is Cyberwar?
On October 11, 2012, then U.S. Secretary of Defense Leon Panetta stated that attacks on the nation’s critical
infrastructure could be “a cyber Pearl Harbor; an attack that would cause physical destruction and the loss of
life.” 7 Many people worry about “cyberwar” or “information warfare.” However, cyberwar does not take place
on a physical battlefield, or on the sea or in the air. Instead, it is a conflict that takes place in or purposefully
affects information systems.
The term cyberwar refers to conflicts between nations and their militaries. Cyberwar attacks are carried out at
the direction of a particular nation. This is the main distinction between cyberwar and other types of
information system attacks that are reported in the news media. Cyberwar could affect military information
systems, nongovernment information systems, and private industry information systems. It includes not only
threats to national security, but also threats to industry, commerce, and intellectual property. It could even
include larger threats to how governments function generally. Consider these examples:
It is believed that Russia used many different tactics, including spreading propaganda on social media,
to interfere in the 2016 U.S. national elections. 8
The 2015 attacks on the Ukrainian power grid are largely thought to be acts of cyberwar committed by
Russia. 9
The 2014 cyberattack against U.S.-based Sony Pictures Entertainment is believed to have been
ordered by the North Korean government. 10
Military, government, and private information systems are connected and difficult to protect. This makes
defining true acts of cyberwar very difficult. The prospect of a cyberwar between nations is every bit as
concerning as a conventional war. As of the writing of this book, there are no cyberwar treaties in place.
Some have been introduced between various countries, and at the United Nations, but none have been
adopted or ratified.
Secretary of Defense Leon E. Panetta, “Remarks by Secretary Panetta on Cybersecurity to the Business
Executives for National Security, New York City” (New York, NY: Oct. 11, 2012). Available at:
http://www.gao.gov/assets/660/652170.pdf (accessed February 4, 2014); BBC News, “Ukraine power cut was
cyber attack.” January 11, 2017, https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-38573074 (accessed May 16, 2020); The
New York Times, “The World Once Laughed at North Korean Cyberpower. No More.” October 15, 2017,
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/15/world/asia/north-korea-hacking-cyber-sony.html (accessed May 16, 2020)
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.This chapter focuses on how the federal government protects its IT systems and
discusses many of FISMA’s provisions. You should be aware that this area of law is
complex and changes often.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.The Federal Information Security Modernization
Act
The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 recognized the complex
nature of the federal computing environment. 11 It also sought to improve oversight of
federal information security activities and provide a framework for making sure that
information security controls are effective. This is important because the U.S.
government anticipates spending over $18 billion on cybersecurity in the fiscal year
2021. 12
Purpose and Scope
FISMA defines information security as protecting IT systems to provide
confidentiality, integrity, and availability. 13 IT systems must be protected from
unauthorized use, access, disruption, modification, and destruction.
FISMA has six main provisions. The law:
Sets forth agency information security responsibilities
Requires a yearly independent review of agency information security programs
Authorizes the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) to develop
information security standards for IT systems that do not contain unclassified
information
Gives the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and Department of Homeland
Security (DHS) specific oversight responsibilities
Clarifies that national security systems (NSSs) must be secured using a risk-
based approach
Provides for a central federal security incident response (IR) center
FISMA applies to federal agencies. These agencies fall under the executive branch
of the U.S. government and report to the president. Examples of federal agencies
include the Federal Aviation Administration, the Social Security Administration, and
the Department of Education.
FISMA also applies to contractors who perform services on behalf of a federal
agency. For example, researchers at universities who work with federal agencies
may have to follow FISMA requirements on their own IT systems because those
systems could store federal data.
Main Requirements
FISMA has many requirements. This section will review many of them. First, this
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.section reviews what federal agencies must do to comply with FISMA. Second, it
reviews how the NIST helps agencies shape their information security programs.
Third, it reviews the federal central IR center. Finally, it reviews how FISMA applies
to national security systems (NSSs). NSSs are IT systems that hold military,
defense, and intelligence information.
Agency Information Security Programs
FISMA requires each federal agency to create an agency-wide information security
program. 14 Even agencies with NSSs must create these programs. An agency’s
information security program must include:
Risk assessments—Agencies must perform risk assessments. They must
measure the harm that could result from unauthorized access to or use of agency
IT systems. Agencies must base their information security programs on the results
of these risk assessments.
Policies and procedures—Agencies must create policies and procedures to
reduce risk to an acceptable level. The policies must protect IT systems
throughout their life cycle. Agencies also must create configuration management
policies.
Subordinate plans—Agencies must make sure that they have plans for securing
networks, facilities, and systems or groups of IT systems. These plans are for
technologies or system components that are a part of the larger information
security program.
Security awareness training—Agencies must give training to employees and
any other users of their IT systems. This includes contractors. This training must
make people aware of potential risks to the agency’s IT systems. It also must
make people aware of their duties to protect these systems.
Testing and evaluation—Agencies must test their security controls at least once
a year. They must test management, operational, and technical controls for each
IT system.
Remedial actions—Agencies must have a plan to fix weaknesses in their
information security program.
Incident response—Agencies must have an IR procedure. They must state how
the agency detects and mitigates incidents. The procedure must include reporting
incidents to the DHS United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-
CERT) as needed.
Continuity of operations—Agencies must have business continuity plans as part
of their information security programs.
An agency’s information security program applies to any other organization that uses
the agency’s IT systems or data. An agency must protect the IT systems that support
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.the agency’s operations, even if another agency or contractor provides the systems.
This can broaden the scope of FISMA, especially because IT systems and functions
are often outsourced.
One of the most important parts of a FISMA information security program is that
agencies test and evaluate it. FISMA requires each agency to perform “periodic
testing and evaluation of the effectiveness of information security policies,
procedures, and practices.” 15 Agencies must test every IT system at least once a
year, and test those with greater risk more often.
Agencies must also review their security controls. Some kinds of security controls
are required under FISMA. The NIST has the authority to create these minimum
requirements. 16 Agencies must follow the standards that NIST creates. An agency
must make sure that it implements these controls properly. It must also make sure
that the controls work. The yearly testing requirement recognizes that security is an
ongoing process. Agencies must always monitor their information security risk. They
must monitor the controls put in place to mitigate that risk as well. The head of the
agency is responsible for determining the right level of risk for the agency.
Agencies must also follow NIST guidance in performing their annual reviews. If
an agency uses a different model to perform its review, that model must include the
same elements that NIST does. The important role of NIST is discussed later in this
chapter.
Under FISMA, agencies must name a senior official to be in charge of information
security. 17 In most agencies, this is the chief information security officer (CISO), who
is responsible for FISMA compliance. The CISO’s main job duties must focus on
information security. Under FISMA, a CISO must have the resources necessary to
make sure that the agency can comply with FISMA.
NOTE
CISOs must be information security professionals and must have the “professional qualifications, including
training and experience, required to administer” FISMA requirements. 19
NOTE
CyberScope, which was created by the DHS, allows a real-time data feed that helps agencies and the
OMB quickly assess the agency’s information security posture.
Agencies have several different reporting requirements under FISMA. For
example, agencies must submit monthly electronic data feeds to the DHS through a
program known as CyberScope. The purpose of these data feeds is to continuously
monitor the security posture of the federal agency’s information systems.
Each agency must report yearly to the OMB on its FISMA compliance activities.
An agency also must send a copy of its yearly report to the following:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.House of Representatives Committee on Oversight and Government Reform
House of Representatives Committee on Homeland Security
House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology
Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO)
The agency’s congressional authorization and appropriations committee 18
An agency’s FISMA report is shared widely and must be in unclassified form. 22 An
agency’s yearly report must review its information security program. Items reviewed
must include:
The adequacy of the program
A description of each major information security incident experienced by the
agency
The total number of information security incidents experienced by the agency
A description of any information security incident experienced by the agency that
compromised personally identifiable information (PII).
It also must assess the agency’s progress on correcting any weaknesses in the
program or security controls. The agency must also respond to a set of questions
about its security practices, which are asked in CyberScope. Each year the DHS
publishes the questions that will be asked in the following year.
In addition to reporting on their information security activities, agencies must also
report on their privacy activities. For example, they have to share information on their
privacy training programs and their breach notification policy. They also must give a
progress report on their efforts to eliminate the unnecessary use of SSNs and other
PII. 23
The yearly report also must include the results of an independent evaluation of
the agency’s information security program. Some agencies have an inspector
general (IG). If an agency has an IG, then the IG may carry out this evaluation.
Some agencies do not have an IG. If they do not, the head of the agency must hire
an external auditor to perform the evaluation. 25
What Is an Inspector General?
An inspector general (IG) is an official who reviews the actions of a federal agency. An IG examines the
agency’s activities to make sure that it is operating efficiently and following good governance practices. IGs
are independent officials by law. The agency that an IG reports to cannot prevent the IG from performing an
audit or investigation.
The Inspector General Act of 1978 defined an IG’s role. 20 An IG is responsible for:
Conducting independent and objective audits, investigations, and inspections
Preventing and detecting waste, fraud, and abuse
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Promoting economy, effectiveness, and efficiency
Reviewing pending legislation and regulations
Keeping the agency head and Congress informed about agency activities 21
IGs are appointed to their positions based on their experience in accounting, auditing, law, and investigations.
They are not political officials. Some agency heads may appoint and remove their own IGs.
The president nominates IGs for major federal agencies, and the Senate approves them. Only the president
can remove these IGs. The president nominates IGs in the Department of Commerce, Department of Justice,
and OMB, as well as in some other agencies.
The Role of NIST
FISMA requires the Department of Commerce to create information security
standards and guidelines. The Commerce Department delegated this responsibility
to NIST, an agency of the Department of Commerce. Under FISMA, NIST must
create:
NOTE
Before CyberScope, the FISMA reporting process was time- and paper-intensive. For example, in 6 years,
the Department of State produced 95,000 pages of paper to meet its FISMA reporting requirements. It
spent $133 million to create these reports. 24
Standards that all federal agencies use to categorize their data and IT systems
Guidelines recommending the types of data and IT systems to be included in each
category
Minimum information security controls for IT systems
NOTE
In general, a standard states mandatory actions that an organization must take to protect its IT systems. A
guideline states recommended actions that an organization should follow.
The OMB has stated that agencies must follow NIST standards and guidelines for
non-NSSs. These standards and guidelines help agencies meet their FISMA
obligations. NIST creates two different types of documents: Federal Information
Processing Standards (FIPS) and Special Publications (SPs). FIPS are standards,
whereas SPs are guidelines.
Federal agencies must follow FIPS. They must comply with new FIPS within 1
year of their publication date. FIPS do not apply to NSSs.
NIST creates FIPS when there is a compelling reason to do so. It creates a FIPS
if there is no acceptable industry standard or solution for the underlying information
security issue. As of this writing, there are 11 FIPS for information security. You can
view them at https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips.
NIST uses procedures described in the Administrative Procedures Act (APA) to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.create FIPS. The APA states formal procedures for creating rules and regulations.
This formal process ensures due process and makes sure that all interested
agencies have a chance to comment on draft FIPS. NIST publishes a proposed
FIPS in the Federal Register, which is available for public review for 30 to 90 days.
The Department of Commerce must approve FIPS before they can be finalized. 26
What Is FedRAMP?
In 2011, the United States adopted a "Cloud First" strategy as part of the Federal Government IT
Modernization Act. That strategy advocated that federal agencies evaluate using cloud computing solutions
for IT operations. In 2018, the U.S. federal government released its "Cloud Smart" strategy. Cloud Smart
provides guidance surrounding the information security and workforce skills needed to adopt cloud computing
models. 27
The Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP) is a government-wide program
developed by NIST, the U.S. General Services Administration, DHS, and the Department of Defense. 28 NIST
also advises the FedRAMP program on FISMA compliance.
Any cloud computing services that store federal data must be FedRAMP approved. The FedRAMP program
has a list of cloud computing providers that hold a FedRAMP designation. Federal agencies can purchase
cloud computing services more quickly from vendors that have those designations.
FedRAMP outlines a standard approach to assess the security of cloud products and services. The
FedRAMP security assessment framework is based on the NIST risk management framework (RMF).
FedRAMP defines the minimum information security controls needed to safeguard cloud computing systems
storing, accessing, and using federal data. Those controls are based on NIST SP 800-53, as revised.
To learn more about FedRAMP, visit https://www.fedramp.gov/.
U.S. Office of Management and Budget, “Federal Cloud Computing Strategy.” Undated,
https://cloud.cio.gov/strategy/ (accessed May 16, 2020); Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program,
“FedRAMP Security Assessment Framework.” November 15, 2017,
https://www.fedramp.gov/assets/resources/documents/FedRAMP_Security_Assessment_Framework.pdf
(accessed May 16, 2020).
SPs are computer security guidelines that are more general than FIPS. NIST
creates SPs in collaboration with industry, government, and academic information
security experts. NIST does not use the very formal FIPS drafting process to create
these documents.
Federal agencies have some flexibility in using the SPs for guidance. They help
guide federal agencies in strengthening their IT systems. The OMB understands that
this may lead to different results among federal agencies. It acknowledges that
different results are expected. Agencies have no flexibility in implementing FIPS, as
they are mandatory.
NIST uses a RMF approach to FISMA compliance. This framework is outlined in
“SP 800-37, Revision 2, Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and
Organizations.” 29 This approach helps protect IT systems during their whole life
cycle. Federal agencies must use the RMF provided by NIST to assess the
information security and privacy risks to their IT systems.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.The NIST RMF outlines six steps to protect federal IT systems. They are:
NOTE
You can view the information security SPs at https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/sp800.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Categorize IT systems.
Select minimum security controls.
Implement security controls in IT systems.
Assess security controls for effectiveness.
Authorize the IT system for processing.
Continuously monitor security controls.
NIST’s RMF recommends a continuous process of categorization, assessment, and
monitoring. FIGURE 8-1 shows this process.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.FIGURE 8-1
Risk management framework process.
Description
NIST guides agencies at each RMF step. “FIPS 199, Standards for Security
Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems,” helps them
categorize their IT systems. 30 It serves as the starting point for an agency’s
information security program and helps them separate their IT systems into
categories based on risk. Agencies then apply security controls to their IT system
based upon their category.
Under FIPS 199, agencies must first assess the impact on IT systems because of
a loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability. The security category expresses that
impact. FIPS defines three security categories. They are:
Low—The loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability has a limited adverse
effect on the agency, its information assets, or people. A low impact event results
in minor damage to assets.
Moderate—The loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability has a serious
adverse effect on the agency, its information assets, or people. A moderate impact
event results in significant damage to assets.
High—The loss of confidentiality, integrity, or availability has a severe or
catastrophic adverse effect on the agency, its information assets, or people. A high
impact event results in major damage to assets.
After the agency determines the security category, it must decide which controls to
use. NIST created two documents to help with this task. They are “FIPS 200,
Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems” 31
and “SP 800-53, Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information
Systems and Organizations.” 32 The OMB requires that agencies use these
documents to make their security control decisions.
NOTE
At the time of this writing, NIST had released a final public draft of NIST SP 800-53, Revision 5. This
revision includes major enhancements to information security and privacy controls. It is anticipated that the
final version of SP 800-53, Rev. 5 will be released in late 2020 or early 2021.
These documents require agencies to specify controls in 17 areas. FIPS 200 lists
these areas. They are:
Access control
Awareness and training
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Audit and accountability
Certification, accreditation, and security assessments
Configuration management
Contingency planning
Identification and authentication
Incident response
Maintenance
Media protection
Physical and environmental protection
Planning
Personnel security
Risk assessment
System and services acquisition
System and communications protection
System and information integrity
Agencies must apply the right security controls. They must tailor controls to the level
of impact. SP 800-53 defines the minimum thresholds, or baselines, for each
category. For example, agencies must use low-impact security controls in IT systems
where an adverse event has a low impact. It must follow a similar practice for
moderate and high impacts.
TABLE 8-1 shows an example of how FIPS 200 and SP 800-53 work together.
The example shows the different baselines for wireless access in the access control
area.
TABLE 8-1 SP 800-53 Access Control Baselines for Wireless Access
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.
DescriptionAgencies can use other NIST guidelines to help them improve their security
controls. For example, NIST has created an SP for protecting the confidentiality of
PII. 33 An agency could use this SP to strengthen its access control baseline for
employees that access PII. Once a federal agency has implemented security
controls, it must test them.
The OMB requires federal agencies to test their security controls. “NIST SP 800-
53A, Revision 4, Assessing Security and Privacy Controls in Federal Information
Systems and Organizations: Building Effective Assessment Plans” walks agencies
through security control assessments. 34 These assessments are performed
throughout the RMF stages.
NIST’s RMF requires agencies to authorize their IT system for processing. This
means that an agency must test its systems and approve its operation. This process
is based on a review of the risk of operating the system. An agency must specifically
accept the risks of operation before allowing an IT system to operate.
Finally, agencies must continuously monitor their security controls and make sure
that they are effective. They also must document any changes to their IT systems
and assess them for new risks.
Central Incident Response Center
Under FISMA, the government must have a federal IR center, which must:
Give technical support to agencies about handling information security incidents.
Compile and analyze data about information security incidents.
Inform agencies about current and potential threats and vulnerabilities.
Inform agencies about threats, vulnerabilities, and incidents to be considered as
part of the agencies’ risk assessment process.
Consult with NIST and agencies with NSSs about information security incidents. 35
Agencies must report all information security incidents to the National Cybersecurity
and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC). The federal IR center is also
known as the US-CERT. Under FISMA, an incident is an event that
NOTE
In 2018, 31 percent of the incidents reported to NCCIC/US-CERT involved employee violations of a federal
agency’s acceptable use policy. 36
“actually or imminently jeopardizes the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of
information or an information system” or
“constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of law, security policies,
security procedures, or acceptable use policies.” 37
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.When an agency reports an incident, it must share as much information about the
incident as possible. They must make reports to the NCCIC/US-CERT within 1 hour
of discovering an incident that potentially compromises the confidentiality, integrity,
or availability of a federal IT system. 38 An agency must share the following
information about an incident when it makes a report:
The impact the incident has had on the agency
Whether any information has been lost, compromised, or corrupted
The estimated amount of time and resources that are needed to recover from the
incident
When the incident was first detected
The number of systems, records, and users impacted
The network location of the incident
Contact information if the NCCIC/US-CERT needs more information
The NCCIC/US-CERT coordinates IR across the U.S. government, shares
information to help the government respond to threats, and also provides information
security tips to the public. You can learn more at https://www.cisa.gov/securing-
federal-networks.
National Security Systems
FISMA requires federal agencies to secure NSSs using a risk-based approach. An
NSS includes systems that are for:
Intelligence activities
Command and control of military forces
Weapons or weapons-control equipment
Use cryptography to protect national security
Critical to military or intelligence missions
Must be kept classified for national defense or foreign policy 39
FYI
FISMA does not apply to classified information. Classified information, which is protected by presidential
executive order, is information that is labeled Confidential, Secret, or Top Secret. Its label is based upon its
national security importance. This data must be protected to meet national security goals.
The Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS) oversees FISMA activities for
NSSs. The CNSS has 21 voting members. They include officials from the National
Security Administration (NSA), Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), and Department of
Defense (DoD). A DoD member leads the committee. The CNSS also includes
several subcommittees and panels. You can learn about the CNSS at
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.www.cnss.gov.
Federal agencies with NSSs must follow CNSS policies. Today, CNSS policies
favor following NIST guidelines and processes whenever possible. 40 However, it was
not always this way. Before 2012, the CNSS often had information security policies
and procedures for NSSs that were either similar to NIST guidance or very different
from NIST guidance. Many commentators thought that practice caused unnecessary
complexity. Today, CNSS adopts NIST guidance whenever it makes sense to do so.
It only issues separate guidance when NIST guidance does not meet the information
security needs of NSSs.
FISMA permits the directors of the DoD and CIA to develop additional information
security policies for NSSs within their own agencies. The OMB must report to
Congress on FISMA compliance for NSSs. It also makes sure that agencies with an
NSS are meeting FISMA’s legal requirements. The OMB makes sure that agencies
with an NSS create an information security program and test it each year.
Oversight
The OMB and the DHS share responsibility for FISMA compliance. The OMB
oversees FISMA-related budgetary issues. It can also withhold funding from
agencies that fail to follow FISMA. In addition, the OMB must continue to issue a
report to Congress each year on the government’s FISMA compliance. This report
details how federal agencies are complying with FISMA. It also identifies problem
areas.
The DHS has had the power to ensure that agencies are meeting their FISMA
obligations. It can also create rules and other guidance that these agencies must
follow. These rules are called binding operational directives. The DHS also keeps
track of how all federal agencies are complying with FISMA and annually reviews
their cybersecurity programs. DHS also has responsibilities for governmental IR
activities.
FYI
The FY2018 FISMA annual report noted that the U.S. federal government continues to have security
deficiencies. 41 The top deficiencies were:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Lack of data protection
Lack of network segmentation
Inconsistent patch management practices
Lack of strong authentication
Lack of continuous monitoring, audit, and logging capacities.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Protecting Privacy in Federal Information
Systems
Data privacy is an important issue for the federal government. There are several
federal laws designed to protect data privacy. The two major laws protecting the
privacy of data that the government uses in the course of business are:
The Privacy Act of 1974 42
The E-Government Act of 2002 43
The Privacy Act of 1974
Congress created the Privacy Act of 1974 to protect data collected by the
government. Although it applies to records created and used by federal agencies in
the executive branch, it does not apply to state or local governments.
Under the Privacy Act, a record is any information about a person that an
agency maintains. It includes a person’s educational, financial, medical, and criminal
history information. 44 The act requires agencies to keep accurate and complete
records. It also states that an agency should store only the data that it needs to
conduct business. It should not store any extra or unnecessary data.
NOTE
The Privacy Act applies only to data collected about U.S. citizens and permanent residents.
The Privacy Act states the rules that an agency must follow to collect, use, and
transfer PII. An agency cannot disclose a person’s records without his or her written
consent. There are 12 exceptions to this general rule. 45 If a situation falls within an
exception, then the agency can disclose records without consent. An agency does
not need written consent to disclose a record if the disclosure is:
Made to a federal agency employee who needs the record to perform his or her
job duties
Required under the Freedom of Information Act
Made for an agency’s routine use
Made to the U.S. Census Bureau to perform a survey
Made for statistical research or reporting, and all personally identifiable data has
been removed
To the National Archives and Records Administration because the record has
historical value
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Made in response to a written request from a law enforcement or regulatory
agency for civil or criminal law purposes
Made to protect a person’s health or safety
Made to Congress
Made to the U.S. Comptroller General in the course of the performance of the
duties of the U.S. Government Accountability Office
Made in response to a court order
Made to a consumer reporting agency for certain permitted purposes
Under the Privacy Act, a person may ask for a copy of any records that an agency
has about that person. 46 The person can ask only for records that are retrievable by
the person’s name, SSN, or some other type of unique identifier. A person also may
ask an agency to amend any incorrect records. If an agency refuses to amend a
person’s record, then that person may sue the agency to have the record amended.
A person also can sue the agency if it denies access to his or her records.
Federal agencies must protect the data that they collect. The Privacy Act requires
them to implement administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to protect the
records that they maintain. They must protect their records against any anticipated
threats that could harm the people identified in the records. Under the act, harm
includes embarrassment. 47
The law requires agencies to give the public notice about their record-keeping
systems. This notice is called a system of records notice (SORN). An agency must
publish a SORN for any system that holds records on an individual. It must publish
SORNs only for systems that retrieve records either by a person’s name or some
other personal identifier. An agency must publish its SORNs in the Federal
Register. 48
FYI
Every agency is required to post its SORNs on its webpage. You can find the SORNs for the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) at https://www.nasa.gov/content/nasa-privacy-act-system-
of-records-notices-sorns.
An agency that violates the Privacy Act can be subject to both civil and criminal
penalties. A person can sue a federal agency for any Privacy Act violation. For
example, people can sue if an agency denies them access to their records. They
also can sue if an agency refuses to amend a record. If a court finds that an agency
has intentionally or willfully violated the act, it can award a plaintiff the actual
damages that he or she suffered because of the violation. Under the law, a person is
entitled to recover at least $1,000. 49 A court also can order the agency to pay the
plaintiff’s attorney fees.
A federal agency employee can be criminally responsible for violating the Privacy
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Act. 50 If an employee improperly discloses information, he or she can be charged
with a misdemeanor. The employee also could be fined up to $5,000. An agency
employee who keeps records without filing a SORN can be fined up to $5,000.
The OMB oversees Privacy Act compliance. It can publish rules for federal
agencies to follow to meet their Privacy Act responsibilities.
The E-Government Act of 2002
The E-Government Act of 2002 has privacy provisions that complement the Privacy
Act. Under the E-Government Act, federal agencies must:
Review their IT systems for privacy risks
Post privacy policies on their websites
Post machine-readable privacy policies on their websites
Report privacy activities to the OMB
A privacy impact assessment (PIA) is an agency’s review of how its IT systems
use personal information. 51 An agency conducts a PIA to make sure that it uses
personal information in a way that follows the law. The PIA also helps an agency
determine the risks of collecting personal information. It also examines the types of
controls that an agency must put in place to reduce privacy risks.
NOTE
A PIA is not the same as a SORN. An agency must perform a PIA any time it collects PII. However, it must
post a SORN whenever that data can be retrieved using a personal identifier.
An agency must conduct a PIA before it develops or buys any IT system that will
collect personal information. It also must perform a PIA anytime its IT systems
change in such a way that new privacy risks are introduced. This includes situations
where an agency changes from paper to electronic systems. An agency must
conduct a PIA if it chooses to outsource an IT system or function that uses personal
data. 52
An agency’s PIA must include information about its data collection practices. This
information is similar to fair information practice principles. The PIA must contain the
following information:
What data the agency will collect
Why the agency is collecting the data
How the agency will use the data
How the agency will share the data
Whether people have the opportunity to consent to specific uses of the data
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.How the agency will secure the data
Whether the data collected will be a system of records defined by the Privacy Act 53
FYI
You can read PIAs from the Federal Trade Commission at https://www.ftc.gov/site-information/privacy-
policy/privacy-impact-assessments.
An agency must submit its PIAs to the OMB. They also must make them available to
the public. The only time an agency does not have to make a PIA available to the
public is when doing so might compromise the security of an IT system.
The E-Government Act requires agencies to post privacy policies on their
websites. The privacy policies must contain the same types of information that are in
a PIA. They make the public aware of how the agency collects information. They
also state how the agency uses that information.
Agencies must post a link to their privacy policies on their main website home
page and write them in language that is easy to understand.
The E-Government Act also requires agencies to adopt machine-readable
privacy policies. These technologies alert users about the agency’s website privacy
practices. A machine-readable privacy policy lets users know if the agency’s privacy
practices match the user’s browser privacy preferences. The machine-readable
privacy policy standard is called P3P. You can read about it at
http://osec.doc.gov/webresources/policies/machine_readable_privcy_policy_statements.htm
NOTE
The website for the U.S. Department of Justice is at www.justice.gov. Can you find the agency’s privacy
policy link on that page?
OMB Breach Notification Policy
Some states have laws, called breach notification laws or data breach laws, that
require businesses and other entities to notify their customers if they suffer a security
breach that discloses personal information. Some of these state laws apply to
businesses operating within the state. Some also apply to state governments. These
laws are discussed further in Chapter 9.
Some federal laws have breach notification provisions. For instance, the rules
promulgated as part of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA) include notification requirements. There is no government-wide federal
breach notification law, although federal laws have been proposed from time to time.
As of this writing, no act has yet passed Congress. A federal breach notification law
would eliminate confusion over when data breaches must be reported to the public.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Over the years the OMB has released several memoranda describing breach
notification requirements for federal agencies. The most recent memorandum was
released in 2017. 54 It states that agencies must create a plan for notifying individuals
who might be potentially affected by a breach impacting the agencies’ IT systems.
The OMB defines a breach as the “loss of control, compromise, unauthorized
disclosure, unauthorized acquisition, or similar occurrence” where unauthorized
individuals access PII. It can also include instances where an authorized individual
accesses PII for a reason that is not authorized or allowed. Under the current
guidance, agencies must review the data disclosed in a breach, determine the
number of individuals affected by the breach, consider the likelihood that the data is
usable by unauthorized individuals, and assess the risk of harm to the people whose
data is disclosed.
An agency has discretion about whether they will notify people about a breach of
their PII. If an agency decides to notify individuals about a breach, they must
consider:
Source of the notification—The highest-ranking agency official should notify
people who are affected by the breach.
Time for notification—Agencies must notify the people affected by the breach
without delay. An agency may delay notice only for law enforcement or national
security reasons.
Contents of the notice—The notice should include a description of the breach
and the type of data disclosed. It should include information on how people can
protect themselves from having their data used by unauthorized individuals. It also
should describe what the agency is doing to mitigate the breach.
Means of providing the notice—The agency must consider how to give notice to
the people affected by the breach. Telephone, first-class mail, email, website
postings, and release to national media outlets may all be appropriate ways to
provide notice. The agency must consider the best method for a given situation.
Agencies also must think about how they will give notice to individuals who are
visually or hearing impaired.
The OMB memo is clear that agencies must report breaches of both paper and
electronic information. You can read it at
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2017/m-17-
12_0.pdf.
Import and Export Control Laws
This chapter has discussed the laws that federal agencies must follow to protect the
security and privacy of information. This section talks briefly about other laws that
are in place to protect the export of certain kinds of data. The United States has
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.export control laws that limit the export of materials, data, and technical information
to foreign countries. The export of some of these items is limited based on U.S.
security interests. It is important to be aware that these types of laws exist. These
laws are very complicated and are reviewed briefly here.
Export means the shipment of items or transmission of technology outside of the
United States. It also means the transmission of technology to a non-U.S. citizen or
nonpermanent resident who is located in the United States. Import and export laws
are reciprocal. An export from the United States is an import to another country. A
person who is bound by U.S. export control laws cannot import controlled items
somewhere else. Much as the United States forbids certain products from being
exported, some other countries forbid certain products from being imported.
There are three different types of export control regulations that restrict the export
of certain items overseas. They also restrict the transmission of certain types of
information to foreign nationals who are living in the United States. The three main
regulations are:
International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR)
Export Administration Regulations (EAR)
Regulations from the Office of Foreign Asset Control (OFAC)
The U.S. Department of State issues the ITAR. 55 They apply to military or defense
applications and technology that does not have civil (nonmilitary or defense) uses.
They are covered under export control laws because of national security concerns.
For instance, the United States may want to prevent terrorists from acquiring certain
types of technologies that could be used to harm the country. Any export of
applications and technology covered by ITAR requires an export license, which is
issued by the Department of State.
FYI
The U.S. Department of State is serious about pursuing ITAR violations. In 2017, a man was sentenced to
15 years in prison and ordered to pay over $4 million in restitution for selling U.S. Army property, including
munitions, on eBay. 56
Items that are covered by ITAR are listed on the U.S. Munitions List, 57 which is
published in the Code of Federal Regulations. The list has 21 categories of different
items. If an item falls within one of these categories, then it is covered by ITAR.
Among the categories are guns and armament, military electronics, spacecraft, and
nuclear weapons.
The penalties for violating ITAR are severe, as civil fines over $1 million are
possible. The Department of State determines civil penalties. 58 ITAR violators also
can be subject to criminal penalties. A person who willfully violates ITAR can be fined
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.up to $1 million per offense. He or she also can be sentenced to up to 20 years in
jail. In addition, companies that violate ITAR can be barred from selling products to
the federal government. 59
The U.S. Department of Commerce handles the EAR. 60 This responsibility is
delegated to the Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS). The EAR applies to dual-use
technologies, which have both military and commercial use.
NOTE
A munition is a military weapon.
Under the EAR, an exporter must have an export license for items and
technologies that are on the Commerce Control List (CCL). In 2018, the BIS
approved about 85 percent of these license applications. 61 The CCL has 10 broad
categories. They include electronics, computers, telecommunications, and
information security technologies. Some items are listed on the CCL when they are
removed from the U.S. Munitions List.
Some items on the CCL cannot be exported even if a person tries to get a license
to do so. Usually, this is because another law or regulation prevents it. For example,
the United States has a comprehensive trade embargo against Cuba, which is the
oldest U.S. embargo. An embargo is a ban against trade with another country. In this
case, the government forbids almost all exports to Cuba. 62
A person who violates the EAR can be subject to both criminal and civil
penalties. 63 Violators can be fined either up to $300,000 or up to twice the value of
the transaction. A person who willfully violates the EAR can be fined up to $1 million
per offense. He or she also can be sentenced to up to 20 years in jail. 64
FYI
The BIS prepares a report about export control violations. You can read the most recent report and learn
more about BIS enforcement activities at https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/enforcement.
The Treasury Department also oversees some export laws. The Office of Foreign
Assets Control (OFAC), which is part of the Treasury Department, enforces trade
sanctions and embargoes. The OFAC administers trade sanctions and embargoes
as part of U.S. foreign policy goals. It has the power to forbid some types of
transactions based upon these goals. You can learn about the OFAC’s sanctions
programs at https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Pages/default.aspx.
OFAC regulations may forbid people in the United States from engaging in any
trade or financial transactions with other countries. People in the United States are
prohibited from engaging in trade with certain people in other countries. For
example, the government prohibits trade with known terrorists or drug traffickers.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.The OFAC publishes a list of individuals and companies that people in the United
States are generally forbidden from dealing with. The people on this list are called
specially designated nationals (SDN). You can view the OFAC’s SDN list at
https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/SDN-List/Pages/default.aspx.
Penalties for violating OFAC regulations are generally the same as for EAR
violations.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.Case Studies and Examples
The OPM is the human resources department for the U.S. federal government.
Among its many responsibilities, the OPM provides background check investigation
services to other federal agencies.
In 2015, the OPM announced two separate information security incidents that
compromised the PII of over 21.5 million people. The incidents were caused by
hackers that infiltrated OPM systems. They also infiltrated the systems of contractors
used by the OPM. They had access to data for more than 6 months. It appears that
the two attacks were coordinated, and some government sources suspect that the
attacks were coordinated by another country.
People impacted by the breach included anyone who underwent a federal
background check investigation from 2000 to 2015. The pool of affected individuals
included federal employees, federal contractors, and active duty service members
and veterans. It also included immediate family members and references for anyone
whose information was stolen. Some of the PII exposed in the incidents included:
SSN
Employment history
Education history
Medical history (including mental health history and information about drug or
alcohol abuse)
Criminal history
Address and address history
Foreign travel history
Personal information of close family members (spouse, partner, parents, siblings)
The PII stolen also included almost 5.6 million records with fingerprint data. Because
of the breaches and public outcry, the OPM director and CIO resigned.
A report from the U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Oversight and
Government Reform noted that the breach happened because the OPM did not
prioritize its information security activities. The report also noted that the OPM did
not meet many FISMA requirements. 65
The OPM maintains a web-based resource center for victims of the 2015
incidents. The resource center includes information on the incident, frequently asked
questions, and guidance for how to sign up for identity theft coverage. The OPM is
required to provide that coverage through 2026 for affected individuals. You can view
the resource center at https://www.opm.gov/cybersecurity/.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter reviews the laws that protect the security and privacy of data
that the federal government uses. FISMA, the main law protecting the
security of federal government IT systems, requires federal agencies to
create information security programs. Agencies also must review their
information security risks. The law requires them to implement controls to
mitigate those risks.
The Privacy Act of 1974 and the E-Government Act of 2002 are the main
laws protecting data privacy at the federal level. These laws govern how
federal agencies use personally identifiable data. Under the E-Government
Act, federal agencies must review their IT systems for any privacy impacts.
Both laws require federal agencies to notify the public about their data
collection practices.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Inspector general (IG)
National security systems (NSSs)
Privacy impact assessment (PIA)
Record
System of records notice (SORN)
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.CHAPTER 8 ASSESSMENT
1. Which regulation controls the export of military or defense applications and
technology?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
ITAR
EAR
OFAC
FDIC
None of these is correct.
2. What information must a federal agency include in a privacy impact
assessment?
3. The information collected in a PIA and a SORN is based upon what principles?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
NIST standards
OMB standards
Fair information privacy practices
ITAR regulations
None of these is correct.
4. Which assessment must be completed any time a federal agency collects
personal information that can be retrieved via a personal identifier?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
PIA
SORN
ACORN
OFAC
None of these is correct.
5. Which agency has primary oversight responsibilities under FISMA?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
DoD
CIA
NIST
CNSS
None of these is correct.
6. Federal agencies must report information security incidents to ________.
7. Federal agencies must test their information security controls every 6 months.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.A. True
B. False
8. What are federal information security challenges?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A culture of merely complying with reporting requirements
Lack of an enterprise approach to information security
Lack of coordination within the federal government
All of these are correct.
None of these is correct.
9. What is the name of the FISMA data-collection tool?
10. Which type of NIST guidance follows a formal creation process?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Special Publications
Federal Information Processing Standards
Guidelines for Information Security
Fair information practice principles
None of these is correct.
11. How many steps are there in the NIST risk management framework?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Six
Five
Four
Three
None of these is correct.
12. Which level of impact for a FIPS security category best describes significant
damage to organizational assets?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Low
Moderate
High
Severe
None of these is correct.
13. FedCIRC is the federal information security incident center.
A. True
B. False
14. How quickly must a federal agency report an unauthorized access incident?
A. Monthly
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.B.
C.
D.
E.
Weekly
Daily
Within 2 hours of discovery
Within 1 hour of discovery
15. How many categories of security controls are designated in FIPS 200?
20
19
18
17
None of these is correct.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.ENDNOTES
1. Remarks by the President, “On Securing Our Nation’s Cyber Infrastructure,”
May 29, 2009. https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-office/remarks-
president-securing-our-nations-cyber-infrastructure (accessed May 16, 2020).
2. Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, “Federal Information
Security: Current Challenges and Future Policy Considerations,” March 24,
2010. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-111hhrg65549/html/CHRG-
111hhrg65549.htm (accessed May 16, 2020).
3. U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Federal Information Security: Agencies
and OMB Need to Strengthen Policies and Practices,” July 2019.
https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/700588.pdf (accessed May 16, 2020).
4. Computer Security Act of 1987, P.L. 100-235, 101 Stat. 1724.
5. Federal Information Security Modernization Act, Title III of the E-Government
Act of 2002, P.L. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899, 2946 (Dec. 17, 2002).
6. The Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014 (Pub. L. No. 113-
283, Dec. 18, 2014) largely superseded the Federal Information Security
Modernization Act of 2002 (FISMA 2002), enacted as Title III, E-Government Act
of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899, 2946 (Dec. 17, 2002).
7. Secretary of Defense Leon E. Panetta, “Remarks by Secretary Panetta on
Cybersecurity to the Business Executives for National Security, New York City”
(New York, NY: Oct. 11, 2012). Available at:
http://www.gao.gov/assets/660/652170.pdf (accessed May 16, 2020).
8. Time, “Here’s What We Know So Far About Russia’s 2016 Meddling,” April 18,
2019. https://time.com/5565991/russia-influence-2016-election/ (accessed May
16, 2020).
9. BBC News, “Ukraine Power Cut Was Cyber Attack,” January 11, 2017.
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-38573074 (accessed May 16, 2020).
10. The New York Times, “The World Once Laughed at North Korean Cyberpower.
No More,” October 15, 2017.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/15/world/asia/north-korea-hacking-cyber-
sony.html (accessed May 16, 2020).
11. U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3551.
12. Statista, “Proposed Budget of the U.S. Government for Cyber Security in FY
2017 to 2021,” February 2020. https://www.statista.com/statistics/675399/us-
government-spending-cyber-security/ (accessed May 16, 2020).
13. U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3552(b)(3).
14. U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3544.
15. U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3554(b)(5).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 278g-3.
U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3554(a)(3).
U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3554(c).
U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3554(b)(3)(A)(ii).
Inspector General Act of 1978, U.S. Code Vol. 5 app, sec. 1.
Inspector General Act of 1978, U.S. Code Vol. 5 app, sec. 2.
U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3554(c)(1)(B).
U.S. Office of Management and Budget, “OMB Circular A-130, Managing
Information as a Strategic Resource, Section 5(f),” July 28, 2016.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/circulars/A130/a130revised
(accessed May 16, 2020).
Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, “Federal Information
Security: Current Challenges and Future Policy Considerations,” March 24,
2010. http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/CHRG-111hhrg65549/html/CHRG-
111hhrg65549.htm (accessed May 16, 2020).
U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3555.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Procedures for Developing
FIPS (Federal Information Processing Standards) Publications,” May 21, 2018.
https://www.nist.gov/itl/procedures-developing-fips-federal-information-
processing-standards-publications (accessed May 16, 2020).
U.S. Office of Management and Budget, “Federal Cloud Computing Strategy,”
Undated. https://cloud.cio.gov/strategy/ (accessed May 16, 2020).
Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program, “FedRAMP Security
Assessment Framework,” November 15, 2017.
https://www.fedramp.gov/assets/resources/documents/FedRAMP_Security_Assessme
(accessed May 16, 2020).
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “SP 800-37, Revision 1, Risk
Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations,”
December 2018.
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-37r2.pdf
(accessed May 16, 2020).
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “FIPS Pub 199, Standards for
Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems,”
February 2004. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/199/final (accessed
May 16, 2020).
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “FIPS Pub 200, Minimum
Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems,” March
2006. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/200/final (accessed May 16,
2020).
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “SP 800-53, Revision 4,
Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
Organizations,” April 2013. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-
53/rev-4/final (accessed May 16, 2020).
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “SP 800-122, Guide to
Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable Information (PII),” April
2010. https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-122/final (accessed May
16, 2020).
National Institute of Standards and Technology, “SP 800-53A, Assessing
Security and Privacy Controls in Federal Information Systems and
Organizations: Building Effective Assessment Plans,” December 2014.
https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-53a/rev-4/final (accessed May 16,
2020).
U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3556.
U.S. Government Accountability Office, “Federal Information Security: Agencies
and OMB Need to Strengthen Policies and Practices,” July 2019.
https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/700588.pdf (accessed May 16, 2020).
U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3552(b)(2).
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Cybersecurity and Infrastructure
Security Agency, “US-CERT Federal Incident Notification Guidelines,” 2017.
https://www.us-cert.gov/incident-notification-guidelines (accessed May 16,
2020).
U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3552(b)(6)(A).
Committee of National Security Systems, “Policy No. 22, Cybersecurity Risk
Management,” August 2016. http://www.cnss.gov/cnss/issuances/Policies.cfm
(accessed May 16, 2020).
Office of Management and Budget, “Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 Annual Report to
Congress,” August 2019. https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2019/08/FISMA-2018-Report-FINAL-to-post.pdf (accessed May
16, 2020).
Privacy Act of 1974, Pub. L. No. 93-579, 88 Stat. 1896, codified at U.S. Code
Vol. 5, sec. 552a.
E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899, codified in
scattered sections throughout U.S. Code Vol. 44 (various sections) (2012).
U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552a(a)(4).
U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552a(b).
U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552a(d).
U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552a(e)(10).
U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552a(e).
U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552a(g)(4)(A).
U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552a(i).
U.S. Office of Management and Budget, “Memo M-03-22: OMB Guidance for
Implementing the Privacy Protections of the E-Government Act of 2002,”
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
September 26, 2003.
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/omb/memoranda_m03-22/ (accessed
May 16, 2020).
E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899, sec. 208.
E-Government Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-347, 116 Stat. 2899, sec. 208.
U.S. Office of Management and Budget, “OMB Memorandum M-17-12,
Preparing for and Responding to a Breach of Personally Identifiable
Information,” January 3, 2017.
https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/whitehouse.gov/files/omb/memoranda/2017/m-
17-12_0.pdf (accessed May 16, 2020).
International Traffic in Arms Regulations, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 22,
sec. 120-130.
U.S. Department of Justice, “Summary of Major U.S. Export Enforcement,
Economic Espionage, and Sanctions Related to Criminal Cases,” January 2018.
https://www.pmddtc.state.gov/sys_attachment.do?
sysparm_referring_url=tear_off&view=true&sys_id=6ae22ec1db2a9740c53a7d321f961
(accessed May 16, 2020).
International Traffic in Arms Regulations, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 22,
sec. 121.1.
International Traffic in Arms Regulations, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 22,
sec. 128.
U.S. Code Vol. 22, sec. 2778(c).
Export Administration Regulations, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 15, sec.
730-774.
U.S. Department of Commerce, “Statistics of 2018 BIS License Authorization,”
April 3, 2019. https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/technology-
evaluation/ote-data-portal/licensing-analysis/2453-2018-statistical-analysis-of-
bis-licensing-pdf-1/file (accessed May 16, 2020).
U.S. Code Vol. 22, sec. 2370.
Export Administration Regulations, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 15, sec.
730-774.
U.S. Code Vol. 50, sec. 4801-4852.
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee Oversight and Government Reform,
“The OPM Data Breach: How the Government Jeopardized Our National
Security for More Than a Generation,” September 7, 2016. https://republicans-
oversight.house.gov/wp-content/uploads/2016/09/The-OPM-Data-Breach-How-
the-Government-Jeopardized-Our-National-Security-for-More-than-a-
Generation.pdf (accessed May 16, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:43:16.
