© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
CHAPTER
1
Information Security Overview
NSURING THAT INFORMATION is secure is not solely the responsibility of
technicians in computer data centers. It also concerns governments,
corporations, and private individuals. The digital revolution greatly changed how
people communicate and do business. Because information exchanges now take
place instantly, and because almost everyone shares data of some kind, you should
question how all organizations use and protect data.
E
This text is about information security and the law. Information security seeks to
protect government, corporate, and individual information and is a good business
practice. Many organizations today want a reputation for properly protecting their
own and their customers’ data, because a good reputation can make a company
stand out from its competitors, increase sales, or make a government agency seem
more trustworthy.
Laws also protect information, especially private personal information. They
require that data be protected in certain ways. Laws are not optional; if a law applies
to an organization, then the organization must follow the law. Laws make information
security more than just a good business practice. They make it a business
requirement.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Chapter 1 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
Why information security is an issue
What information security is
What the basic information security concepts are
What common information security concerns are
How different types of information require different types of protection
Which mechanisms protect information security
How special kinds of data require special kinds of protection
Chapter 1 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the key concepts and terms associated with information
security
Describe information security goals and give examples of each
Describe common information security concerns
Describe mechanisms used to protect information security
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Why Is Information Security an Issue?
Every day the news media reports stories such as these:
Someone attacks a university computer and gains access to the records of over
30,000 students and staff members. These records include names, photographs,
and Social Security numbers (SSNs).
A hospital experiences a cyberattack that prevents hospital staff from accessing
computer systems and patient records. Therefore, the hospital must turn away
patients until its computer systems and access are restored.
A bank loses a backup tape, potentially exposing more than 1 million customer
records. The tape is never found.
A company that processes credit cards stores unencrypted account information on
its servers. Attackers gain access to the servers, exposing over 40 million
accounts.
An email scam targets an organization by asking employees to verify their account
settings. When employees respond, they provide their computer usernames and
passwords. Attackers then use those credentials to access and compromise the
organization’s computer systems.
Organizations use and store a lot of data to conduct their business operations. For
many, information is one of their most important assets. Organizations use large
and complex databases to keep track of customer product preferences, as well as
manage the products and services that they offer customers. They also transfer
information to other businesses so that both companies can benefit.
Organizations collect data for many reasons. Much of the data they collect is
personal information, which can be used to identify a person. Personally identifiable
information includes the following:
SSNs
Driver’s license numbers
Financial account data, such as account numbers or personal identification
numbers (PINs)
Health data and biometric data
Authentication credentials, such as logon or usernames and passwords
Based on media reports, security breaches appear to be growing both in number
and in the severity of damage they cause to organizations. These breaches result in
data that is lost, stolen, disclosed without permission, or rendered unusable. A
security breach can damage an organization’s reputation, which may prompt
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.customers take their business elsewhere. Following a breach, the organization may
also have to pay fines and/or defend itself in court. If a security breach is particularly
bad, an organization’s leaders can face criminal charges.
As noted, an organization that fails to protect its information risks damaging its
reputation—or worse. Information security is the term that generally describes the
types of steps an organization should take to protect its information.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.What Is Information Security?
Information security is the study and practice of protecting information. Its main
goal is to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information.
Professionals usually refer to this as the C-I-A triad, or sometimes the A-I-C triad. (A
triad is a group of three things considered to be a single unit.)
The C-I-A triad appears in FIGURE 1-1.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.
FIGURE 1-1
The C-I-A triad.Description
The need to protect information is not a new concept. For instance, Julius Caesar
used a simple letter-substitution code to share secrets with his military commanders.
Caesar used this type of code, called a Caesar cipher, to ensure that his enemies
could not read his messages. Cryptography is the practice of hiding information so
that unauthorized persons cannot read it. Using cryptography preserves
confidentiality, because only those with the secret key are able to read an encoded
note.
NOTE
You might think that information security refers only to data stored on a computer. However, it refers to
information in both paper and electronic form.
Secret decoder badges were popular during the golden days of radio (about
1920–1950). Business sponsors often paid for decoders to market their products,
and radio program fan clubs gave them to their members to promote specific radio
shows. These secret decoder badges often used a Caesar cipher.
In some ways, however, information security is a relatively new area of study.
Modern computing systems have existed only since the 1960s, and the internet did
not exist in its current form until almost 1983. The first well-known computer security
incident was discovered in 1986, and President Obama created the first
“cybersecurity czar” in the federal government in 2009.
The range of information security topics may seem overwhelming. However, it is
important to keep in mind that the main goal of information security is to protect the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data.
What Is Confidentiality?
Confidentiality means that only people with the right permission can access and use
information. It also means protecting information from unauthorized access at all
stages of its life cycle. You must create, use, store, transmit, and destroy information
in ways that protect its confidentiality.
NOTE
Cliff Stoll described the first well-known computer security incident in his book The Cuckoo’s Egg: Tracking
a Spy Through the Maze of Computer Espionage. Stoll noticed an error in the records of systems
connected to the internet’s predecessor—the Advanced Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET).
During the investigation, he exposed an international plot to steal information from U.S. computer systems.
Encryption is one way to make sure that information remains confidential while it
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.is stored and transmitted. The encryption process converts information into code that
is unreadable. Only people authorized to view the information can decode and use it,
thereby protecting the information’s confidentiality. Attackers who intercept an
encrypted message cannot read it because they do not have the key to decode it.
Access controls, another way to ensure confidentiality, grant or deny access to
information systems. An example of an access control is requiring a password or
PIN to access a computer system. Passwords keep unauthorized individuals out of
information systems. You also can use access controls to ensure that individuals
view only information they have permission to see.
Individuals can compromise information confidentiality on purpose or by accident.
For example, shoulder surfing is a type of intentional attack. It occurs when an
attacker secretly looks “over the shoulder” of someone at a computer and tries to
discover his or her sensitive information without permission. Shoulder surfing is a
visual attack, because the attacker must view the personal information. This term
also describes attacks in which a person tries to learn sensitive information by
viewing keystrokes on a monitor or keyboard. Attackers use the stolen data to
access computer systems and commit identity theft.
Social engineering is another type of attack that represents an intentional threat
to confidentiality. These attacks rely heavily on human interaction. They take
advantage of how people normally talk with one another and interact. It is not a
technical attack, but rather involves tricking other people to break security rules and
share sensitive information. Social engineering attackers take advantage of human
nature, such as kindness, helpfulness, and trust. Because the attackers are so
charming, their victims want to help them by providing information. The attacker then
uses the information obtained from the victim to try to learn additional sensitive
information. The attacker’s ultimate goal is to obtain enough information to access
computer systems or gain access to protected areas.
FYI
The classic film The Sting is a great example of a social engineering scam. In the movie, two con artists,
played by Paul Newman and Robert Redford, set up an elaborate plan to con a man out of his money.
Their scam, which takes advantage of human nature, relies heavily on manipulating the victim and those
around him.
Kevin Mitnick is perhaps one of the best-known computer hackers of all time. In his book The Art of
Deception, he writes that he gained much of the information he used to compromise computer systems
through social engineering. Mitnick said that it was very easy to get information from people if he asked
questions in the right way.
Confidentiality compromises also take place by accident. For example, an
employee of the U.S. Transportation Security Administration (TSA) posted a
redacted copy of a TSA manual on a federal website in December 2009. This
manual described how TSA agents should screen airline passengers and luggage. It
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.also contained the technical details of how airport screening machines work. The
manual contained pictures of identification cards for average Americans, Central
Intelligence Agency employees, and U.S. legislators.
The TSA posted the manual by mistake, and for several months the public had
access to the manual online. Although TSA employees had redacted some portions
of the manual, the TSA improperly performed technical aspects of the redaction.
Therefore, some people were able to uncover the original information with common
software tools. Those people then reposted the manual on several other
nongovernmental websites. Some of these websites posted the document with all of
the original text available.
The manual also highlighted the increase in airport security requirements after
the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. Once posted, the unredacted material
could have been used by attackers to exploit new airport security measures. The
TSA argued that posting the manual did not compromise the safety of U.S. air travel.
Nonetheless, lawmakers immediately questioned the TSA about the incident and
asked how the TSA would mitigate the disclosure. Lawmakers wanted to know how
the government could prevent other websites from reposting the unredacted manual.
They also asked what the TSA would do to prevent similar mistakes in the future.
What Is Integrity?
Integrity means that information systems and their data are accurate. It ensures that
changes cannot be made to data without appropriate permission. If a system has
integrity, it means that the data in the system is moved and processed in predictable
ways and does not change when it is processed.
Controls that ensure the correct entry of information protect the data’s integrity. In
a computer system, this means that if a field contains a number, the system checks
the values that a user enters to make sure that the user actually entered numbers.
Making sure that only authorized users have the ability to move or delete files on
information systems also protects integrity. Antivirus software is another example of
a control that protects integrity. This type of software checks to make sure that there
are no viruses in the system that could harm it or change the data in it.
Information system integrity can be compromised in several ways, either
accidentally or intentionally. For example, an employee may accidentally mistype a
name or address during data entry. Integrity is compromised if the system does not
prevent or check for this type of error. Another common type of accidental
compromise of integrity is an employee deleting a file by mistake.
Integrity compromises also can take place intentionally. Employees or external
attackers are potential threats. For example, suppose an employee deletes files that
are critical to an organization’s business. The employee might do this on purpose
because of some grievance against the organization. Employees or others affiliated
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.with an organization are sometimes called insider threats when they purposefully
harm an organization’s information systems. External attackers also are a concern.
They can infect information systems with computer viruses or vandalize a webpage.
External attackers who access systems without permission and deliberately change
them harm confidentiality and integrity.
In 2007, three Florida A&M University students installed secret keystroke loggers
on computers in the university registrar’s office. A keystroke logger is a device or
program that records keystrokes made on a keyboard or mouse, which the students
used to obtain the usernames and passwords of registrar employees. For a fee, the
hackers modified 650 grades in the computer system for other students, changing
many failing scores to an “A.” The student hackers also changed the residency
status of other students from “out-of-state” to “in-state,” which resulted in the out-of-
state students paying less tuition.
The university discovered the keystroke loggers during a routine audit. It then
found the modified data. Although the university fixed the incorrect data, the student
hackers accessed the system and changed the data again. However, the university
discovered the hackers’ identities through additional security measures such as
logging and audit review.
Prosecutors charged the student hackers with breaking federal laws. The court
sentenced two of them to 22 months in prison each. In September 2009, it
sentenced the third student hacker to 7 years in prison.
The Florida A&M case illustrates how safeguards can be implemented to protect
the integrity of computer systems. Routine security audits can detect unauthorized or
harmful software on a system.
What Is Availability?
Availability, the security goal of making sure information systems operate reliably,
ensures that data is accessible when it needs to be. It also helps to ensure that
individuals with proper permission can use systems and retrieve data in a
dependable and timely manner.
Organizations need to have information available to conduct their business.
When systems work properly, an organization can function as intended. Ensuring
availability means that systems and information are available during peak hours
when customer demand is high. System maintenance should be scheduled for off
hours when customer demand is low.
Availability can be protected in several ways. Information systems must recover
quickly from disturbances or failures. Organizations create plans that describe how
to repair or recover systems after an incident. These plans specify how long systems
may be offline before an organization starts to lose money or fails to meet its
business goals. In the worst case, an organization might go out of business if it
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.cannot repair its information systems quickly.
Organizations also can protect system availability by designing systems to have
no single points of failure. A single point of failure is a piece of hardware or
application that is key to the functioning of the entire system. If that single item fails,
a critical portion of the system could fail. Single points of failure also can cause the
whole system to fail.
An easy example of a single point of failure is a modem, which connects an
organization to the internet. If the modem fails, the organization cannot connect to
the internet. Thus, if the organization does most of its business online, the modem
failure can really hurt its business.
Organizations also can protect availability by using redundant equipment that has
extra functional elements designed into it. In the event of a failure, the extra
elements make sure that the piece of equipment is still able to operate for a certain
period. Backing up systems also ensures their availability.
Attackers target availability in order to harm an organization’s business. As an
example, a denial of service (DoS) attack disrupts information systems so they are
no longer available to users. These attacks also can disable internet-based services
by consuming large amounts of bandwidth or processing power, as well as disable
an organization’s website. These services are critical for businesses that sell web-
based products and services or provide information via the internet.
Not all DoS attacks directly target information systems and their data. Attackers
also target physical infrastructures. For example, an organization can experience a
loss of availability if an attacker cuts a network or power cable. The result is the
same as a technical DoS attack: Customers and other audiences cannot reach the
needed services.
Unplanned outages can also negatively impact availability. An outage is an
interruption of service. For example, natural disasters may create outages, such as a
power outage after an earthquake. Outages also take place if a technician
accidentally cuts a service cable.
NOTE
Domain Name Service (DNS) providers translate internet domain names into Internet Protocol (IP)
addresses. In 2016 the Mirai malware was used to attack a major DNS provider named Dyn. The Dyn
attack was one of the largest DoS attacks to date, affecting websites for large companies such as Netflix,
Amazon, and the New York Times.
A website experiencing an increase in use can result in a loss of availability.
When Michael Jackson died in 2009, for example, the internet experienced a
massive increase in search queries from people trying to find out what had
happened to him. The rapid rise in search traffic caused Google to believe it was
under a DoS attack. In response to this perceived attack, Google slowed down the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.processing of “Michael Jackson” queries. Users entering those queries received
error messages until Google determined its services were not under attack.
The Michael Jackson/Google example shows that organizations can take actions
to make sure their information systems are available to their customers. These
actions can alert organizations to an issue, prompting them to take steps to correct
it.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Basic Information Security Concepts
Several different concepts are helpful in understanding information security and the
laws that affect it. Laws that regulate information security often use risk
management, the process of understanding the risks that an organization faces and
then taking steps to address or mitigate them, to justify them. You will briefly learn
about basic risk management concepts and terms here.
Vulnerabilities
A vulnerability is a weakness or flaw in an information system. They may be
construction or design mistakes, as well as flaws in how an internal safeguard is
used or not used. Not using antivirus software on a computer, for instance, is a
vulnerability. Vulnerabilities can be exploited (used in an unjust way) to harm
information security.
There are many different types of vulnerabilities. You can classify them into the
following broad categories:
People
Process
Facility
Technology
People can cause several vulnerabilities. For example, one employee could know
too much about a critical function in an organization. This is a violation of the
separation of duties principle. This rule requires that two or more employees must
split critical task functions so that no one employee knows all of the steps of the
critical task. When only one employee knows all of the steps of a critical task, that
employee can use the information to harm the organization. The harm may go
unnoticed if other employees cannot access the same information or perform the
same function.
NOTE
A common example of the separation of duties principle is a rule requiring two people to sign organization
checks. This is so one person cannot steal from the organization by writing and signing checks made out
to himself or herself. Requiring two signatures thus protects the organization.
Process-based vulnerabilities are flaws or weaknesses in an organization’s
procedures that an attacker can exploit to harm security. Process-based
vulnerabilities include missing steps in a checklist, as well as not having a checklist
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.in the first place. Another process vulnerability is the failure to apply hardware and
software vendor patches in a timely manner. A patch is a piece of software or code
that updates a program to address security or other operational problems. Patches
are available for many types of software, including operating systems. Software and
information systems may be open to attack if patches are not properly applied.
Facility-based vulnerabilities are weaknesses in physical security. Buildings,
equipment, and other property are resources an organization must protect. An
example of poor physical security is an organization that does not have a fence
around its property. Another is an open server room that any employee can access.
Vulnerabilities also can be technology based. Improperly designed information
systems fall into this category. Some design flaws allow people to access information
systems without permission. After gaining entry, the person may enter unauthorized
code or commands that disrupt the system. Unpatched and outdated applications
are technology vulnerabilities. So are improperly configured equipment, such as
firewalls or routers.
Customers do not like flaws in the products that they buy. Therefore, they expect
vendors to inform them quickly about product flaws. Vulnerability management
programs make sure that vendors find any flaws in their products and quickly correct
them. They also ensure that customers are made aware of problems so they can
take protective action. The Microsoft Corporation, for example, issues a monthly
security bulletin for customers that lists known vulnerabilities in the company’s
products. The bulletin also explains how to address them. This bulletin is part of
Microsoft’s vulnerability management program.
Exploits are successful attacks against a vulnerability. They take place in a
period known as the window of vulnerability, as shown in FIGURE 1-2. This
window opens when someone discovers a vulnerability and closes when a vendor
reduces or eliminates it. Exploits take place while the window is open.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.FIGURE 1-2
The window of vulnerability.
Description
The window of vulnerability is a notable concept. In some ways, this window is
shrinking fast because more people are interested in information security. Many
people have developed the skills to find new vulnerabilities. Often they report them
to the company that provides the product or service so the company can fix the
vulnerability. Not all people act with good intentions, however: There are also people
with the skills needed to find and exploit vulnerabilities who do so for financial gain.
The number of vulnerabilities appears to be growing. The National Vulnerability
Database (NVD) recorded almost 52 new vulnerabilities per day in December 2019. 1
One reason for this could be that information systems are becoming larger and more
complex. Another possibility is that as more people work together to create new
systems, the likelihood of introducing flaws increases. Poor programming practices
may be another reason. Vulnerabilities also may be increasing because of a lack of
quality controls to make sure that systems are secure and work as intended.
The number of known vulnerabilities also may be increasing because some
developers use well-known programming codes and components to design systems.
They also use well-known software in the systems they design. Using familiar
components makes it easier for many people to work together on the same project.
There are dangers, however. The better known the code, hardware, or software, the
greater the chance that an attacker also has the necessary skills to find
vulnerabilities in the final product.
NOTE
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Some vulnerabilities are exploited almost as soon as they are discovered. The term for this is a zero-day
vulnerability. It is unique because the vulnerability is exploited before a vendor provides a patch or some
other fix.
Threats
Threats are anything that can harm an information system. They are successful
exploits against vulnerabilities. A threat source—which is a person or a circumstance
—carries out a threat or causes it to take place.
It is worth taking some time to understand how vulnerabilities and threats are
related. For example, an organization may have few controls to prevent an employee
from deleting critical computer files. This lack of controls is the vulnerability. A well-
meaning employee could delete files by mistake. In this case, the employee is the
threat source. The threat is the action of deleting the critical files. If the employee
deletes the files, a successful exploit of the vulnerability has taken place. If the files
are not recoverable, or recoverable only at great expense, the incident harms the
organization and its security. In this example, availability and integrity are
compromised.
Threats fall into broad categories:
Human—Threats carried out by people. Common examples are internal and
external attackers. Even the loss of key personnel in some instances is a type of
human threat. People threats include both good actors and bad actors. Good
actors include well-meaning employees; bad actors are attackers who intend to
harm an organization.
Natural—Uncontrollable events such as earthquakes, tornadoes, fires, and floods.
These types of threats are not predictable, and organizations cannot control these
types of threats.
Technological and operational—Threats that operate inside information systems
to harm information security goals. Malicious code is an example of these threats.
Hardware and software failures are technology threats. Improperly running
processes are also threats.
Physical and environmental—Facility-based threats. These types of threats can
include a facility breach caused by lax physical security. Loss of heating or cooling
within a facility is an example of an environmental threat.
Threats are either deliberate or accidental. Accidental threats are the results of
either unintentional actions or inactions. You can think of accidental threats as
mistakes or “acts of God.” Unintended equipment failure also is an accidental threat.
Mistakes most often are the result of well-meaning employees. The file deletion
example at the beginning of this section is an accidental threat. The TSA employee
improperly posting the manual to a website, as mentioned earlier, is also an
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.accidental threat. Organizational policy and security training and awareness can help
mitigate such mistakes.
An act of God that disrupts services or compromises information security is an
accidental threat. Earthquakes, tornadoes, floods, and wildfires caused by lightning
or other natural events, are all examples of acts of God. It is hard for organizations to
plan for these types of threats, although they can take basic precautions against
some types of natural disasters by building redundant systems. An organization also
may choose not to build facilities in areas prone to environmental instability.
NOTE
The U.S. government maintains the NVD, a searchable database of known security flaws and
weaknesses. It also includes listings of known system problems. The National Cyber Security Division of
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security sponsors the NVD. You can find it at
http://nvd.nist.gov/home.cfm.
All organizations must plan for equipment failure. Sometimes equipment breaks
through no fault of its operators. Sometimes it reaches the end of its life and simply
stops working. Unfortunately, it is hard for organizations to plan for such failures.
This is especially true if the equipment that fails is particularly specialized or
expensive. Organizations can mitigate this type of threat by building redundant
systems and keeping spare parts on hand.
Deliberate threats are intentional actions taken by attackers. Both internal and
external attackers are deliberate threats. Internal attackers have current
relationships with the organization that they are targeting. They can cause a lot of
damage in computer systems because they have special knowledge about those
systems. Internal attackers are often called malicious insider threats because they
use their legitimate access to knowingly harm an organization. Upset employees are
often the cause of internal attacks. They might wish to harm the organization by
causing a loss of productivity. They also may wish to embarrass the organization or
hurt its reputation. These attackers may purposefully delete files or disclose
information without permission. They also may intentionally disrupt the availability of
information systems.
Internal attackers also can take advantage of lax physical security. They might do
this to steal resources such as confidential information. Theft of resources is a
problem for many organizations.
In 2007, a former Coca-Cola employee was sentenced to 8 years in prison for
stealing Coca-Cola trade secrets. She also was ordered to pay $40,000 in
restitution. 2 This employee stole Coca-Cola secrets and tried to sell them to rival
Pepsi. Surveillance video showed the employee putting company documents into
bags and leaving the building. She did the same thing with a container of a Coca-
Cola product sample. All of these actions were violations of Coca-Cola company
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.policies. The theft was discovered when Pepsi informed Coca-Cola.
NOTE
Act of God is a legal term that describes a natural event or disaster for which no person is responsible.
NOTE
It is not possible to identify every security vulnerability, to plan for every threat, or to identify all risks. Even
when you identify risks, you cannot limit all risk of harm.
External attackers are another concern. They usually have no current relationship
with the organization they are targeting. Some are former employees with special
knowledge about the organization. External hackers include spies, saboteurs, and
terrorists. Many seek financial gain. Others want to embarrass an organization,
make a political statement, or exploit systems for a challenge.
Organizations must take steps to avoid threats. When an employee leaves an
organization, the organization should promptly remove his or her access to
information systems and to physical property. Good information security practices
also help reduce threats posed by external attackers. These include patching known
vulnerabilities in hardware and software. They also include monitoring access to
systems and engaging in logging and audit review.
Risks
A risk is the likelihood that a threat will exploit a vulnerability and cause harm to the
organization. These impacts from threats vary but can generally be sorted into six
categories:
Financial—Risks that affect financial resources or financial operations
System/Service—Risks that impact how an organization provides information
technology (IT) systems and services
Operational—Risks that affect the normal operation of information systems and
services
Reputational—Risks that negatively affect an organization’s reputation or brand
Compliance—Risks that relate to a possible violation of a law, regulation, or
organizational policy
Strategic—Risks that may have a lasting impact on an organization’s long-term
viability
You can measure impact in terms of money costs or by perceived harm to the
organization.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Not all risks receive or require the same level of attention from an organization.
Organizations engage in complex risk analysis and risk management programs to
classify and respond to risks. A brief overview of some risk analysis and
management terms is included here.
Risk analysis is the process of reviewing known vulnerabilities and threats.
Organizations generally classify the probability that a threat will exploit a vulnerability
as low, medium, or high. They then attempt to assess the impact of a successful
exploit. An organization should address risks that have large impacts on the
organization and its information security.
All organizations must assess risk, as well as respond to it. Organizations have
several options for responding to risk. Common responses include:
Risk avoidance
Risk mitigation
Risk transfer
Risk acceptance
Organizations apply safeguards to respond to vulnerabilities, threats, and, ultimately,
risk. A safeguard is any protective action that reduces exposure to vulnerabilities or
threats. A risk response strategy determines how safeguards should be applied.
Organizations can try to get rid of risk by applying safeguards to fix vulnerabilities
and control threats. Risk avoidance is the process of applying safeguards to avoid a
negative impact. A risk avoidance strategy seeks to eliminate all risk. This is often
very difficult or expensive.
Organizations also can mitigate risk to reduce, but not eliminate, a negative
impact. This response strategy is called risk mitigation. Using this strategy,
organizations apply safeguards to vulnerabilities and threats to lower risk to an
acceptable level. The amount of risk left over after applying safeguards is called
residual risk.
Organizations also transfer risk. In a strategy of risk transfer, an organization
passes its risk to another entity, at which point the risk impact is borne by the other
entity. An organization might choose this type of strategy when the cost of mitigating
risk is more expensive than transferring it. For example, organizations could
purchase cyber liability insurance in response to a potential risk. By purchasing
these policies, which have grown popular in the last several years, the organization
transfers its risk to the insurance company, which bears the cost of any risk impact.
While the terms of these insurance policies vary, they can cover losses caused by
unauthorized access to information systems, system interruption, and crime.
An organization also can decide to deliberately take no action against an
identified risk, which is called risk acceptance. This type of strategy means that
avoiding, mitigating, or transferring risk is not part of the organization’s risk response
plan. Organizations do not take decisions to accept risk lightly, but may choose to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.accept the risk if the cost of the risk itself is less than the cost to avoid, mitigate, or
transfer the risk.
Safeguards
A safeguard reduces the harm posed by information security vulnerabilities or
threats and may eliminate or reduce the risk of harm. They are controls or
countermeasures, terms that can be used interchangeably.
FYI
A passphrase is a long password that is made of a sequence of words or text. Unlike passwords, which
are usually shorter, passphrases are usually 20 characters or more. The best passphrases are easy to
remember. However, they should be hard to guess—for example, they should not be famous quotes from
popular books.
Safeguards belong to different classifications according to how they work. These
classification levels are:
Administrative
Technical
Physical
Administrative safeguards are rules implemented to protect information and
information systems. These safeguards usually take the form of organizational
policies, which state the rules of the workplace. Laws and regulations may influence
these safeguards. One common administrative safeguard is the workplace rule of
need to know.
By applying need to know, an employer gives employees access only to the data
they need to do their jobs. An employee does not receive access to any other data
even if he or she has appropriate clearance. Using need-to-know principles makes it
harder for unauthorized access to occur and protects confidentiality. There
eventually should be technical enforcement of these principles. However, the first
step is specifying that a workplace will follow them.
Technical safeguards, also called logical safeguards, are the rules that state
how systems will operate and are applied in the hardware and software of
information systems. Technical safeguards include automated logging and access-
control mechanisms, firewalls, and antivirus programs. Using automated methods to
enforce password strength is a technical control.
One technical safeguard that companies use to protect information security is the
access control rule of least privilege. This rule, which is very similar to the need-to-
know rule, means that systems should always run with the least amount of
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.permissions needed to complete tasks. For example, some operating systems allow
administrators to set up different privilege levels for system users. This helps enforce
least privilege concepts. Users with administrative privileges can access all system
functions, and therefore can fully manipulate and modify the system and its
resources.
Local users, in contrast, have fewer privileges. They are able to use only some
programs or applications. They cannot add, modify, delete, or manipulate the
computer system. Power users have more privileges than local users but fewer
privileges than administrators do. Power users may use and access many functions
of the computer system. However, they may not modify critical functions of the
operating system.
Physical safeguards are actions that an organization takes to protect its actual,
tangible resources. These safeguards keep unauthorized individuals out of
controlled areas and people away from sensitive equipment. Common physical
safeguards are:
Key-card access to buildings
Fences
Doors
Locks
Security lighting
Video surveillance systems
Security guards
Guard dogs
A more sophisticated example of a physical security control is a mantrap, as shown
in FIGURE 1-3. A mantrap is a method of controlled entry into a facility that provides
access to secure areas such as a research lab or data center. This method of entry
has two sets of doors on either end of a small room. When a person enters a
mantrap through one set of doors, the first set must close before the second set can
open. This process effectively “traps” a person in the small room.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.
FIGURE 1-3An example of a mantrap.
Description
Often a person must provide different credentials at each set of mantrap doors.
For example, the first set of doors might allow access to the mantrap via a card
reader, in which an employee scans an identification badge to gain entry. The
second set of doors then may require a different method to open, such as entering a
PIN on a keypad. Technicians often configure mantraps so that both sets of doors
lock if a person cannot provide the appropriate credentials at the second set of
doors. When locked in a mantrap, the person must await “rescue” by a security
guard or another official.
Mantraps are not just for highly sensitive data centers or labs. Some apartment
buildings apply a modified mantrap concept to building entry. In these buildings, any
individual can access the lobby area of the apartment building. However, only people
with keys or access cards may pass through a locked security door and enter the
building’s interior. Usually, only residents have the proper credentials to enter the
interior. Guests to the building need to use an intercom or telephone system to
contact the resident they want to visit. The apartment resident can then “buzz”
guests through the locked door to allow access to the building’s interior.
You also can classify safeguards based on how they act. These classification
levels are:
Preventive
Detective
Corrective
Preventive controls are safeguards used to prevent security incidents. These
controls keep an incident from happening. For example, door locks are a preventive
safeguard, because they help keep intruders out of the locked area. Fencing around
a building is a similar preventive control. Teaching employees how to avoid
information security threats is another preventive control.
Detective controls are safeguards put in place in order to detect, and sometimes
report, a security incident while it is in progress. Examples of detective controls
include logging system activity and reviewing the logs. Log review can look for
unauthorized access or other security anomalies that require attention. An anomaly
is something strange or unusual—activity that is not normal.
Corrective safeguards are automated or manual controls put in place in order to
limit the damage caused by a security incident. Some types of databases allow an
administrator to “roll back” to the last known good copy of the database in the event
of an incident. Corrective controls also can be quite simple: locking doors
inadvertently left unlocked, for example.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.TABLE 1-1 summarizes the safeguards described in this section.
TABLE 1-1 A Safeguards Matrix
Description
Choosing Safeguards
Organizations may have difficulty choosing safeguards, so they use reference
guides to help with this task. Two of the most common guides are the “ISO/IEC
27002:2013, Information Technology—Security Techniques—Code of Practice for
Information Security Controls” (2013) and “NIST Special Publication 800-53 (Rev. 4),
Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations”
(2013).
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the International
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) first published ISO/IEC 27002 in December
2000. These two groups work together to create standards for electronic
technologies. ISO/IEC 27002 has 14 major sections. Each discusses a different
category of information security safeguards or controls. They explain why
organizations should use the listed controls and how to use them. Security
practitioners often use ISO/IEC 27002 as a practical guide for developing security
standards and best practices.
“NIST Special Publication 800-53 (Rev. 4), Security and Privacy Controls for
Federal Information Systems and Organizations” was published in 2013 (and
updated in 2015) by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST). This
document states the minimum safeguards required in order to create an effective
information security program. NIST developed this guidance specifically for federal
agency use on federal information systems. Many nongovernmental organizations
also use the document to help guide their own information security programs.
Revision 5 of this guidance, currently titled “Security and Privacy Controls for
Information Systems and Organizations,” was published in 2017. This draft was still
undergoing the review process at the time this chapter was written.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.What Are Common Information Security
Concerns?
Information security practitioners have their hands full. This section describes some
of the concerns that practitioners deal with daily.
Shoulder Surfing
As mentioned previously in this chapter, shoulder surfing occurs when an attacker
looks over the shoulder of another person at a computer to discover sensitive
information that the attacker has no right to see. This is not a technical exploit. The
attacker could be attempting to learn usernames and passwords or discover
sensitive information by viewing keystrokes on a monitor or keyboard. Shoulder
surfing is a concern at public places such as automated teller machines (ATMs) or
self-service credit card terminals at grocery stores.
Shoulder surfing can also can be a concern at airports, coffee shops, and other
places with wireless access. Computer users may attempt to access email accounts,
bank accounts, and other sensitive information while in these public places. Usually
the computer user is focusing on their computing device and not paying attention to
the people around them. While the user’s guard is down, they may not notice that
the coffee drinker at the next table is shoulder surfing and recording the computer
user’s sensitive information.
Social Engineering
Social engineering describes an attack that relies heavily on human interaction. It is
not a technical attack. This type of attack involves tricking other people and taking
advantage of their human nature to break normal security procedures and gain
sensitive information.
These attacks are sometimes simple to carry out. For instance, an attacker
telephones a large organization and identifies himself as a member of that same
organization’s technology group. He has a conversation with the person who
answered the phone.
The attacker might ask about that person’s internet connectivity or computing
equipment. The person answering the call, who is inclined to be helpful and
participate in the conversation, trusts the attacker because he said that they both
work for the same organization.
The attacker may ask for the person’s username, identification number, or logon
name at the end of the call, claiming that this is for verification purposes. The person
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.answering the call might provide that information because it seems to be a
reasonable request. Without much effort, the attacker has gained information that
could be used to access organizational resources. This is a social engineering
attack.
Phishing and Targeted Phishing Scams
Phishing is a form of internet fraud that takes place in electronic communications
where attackers attempt to steal valuable information from their victims. These
attacks can take place via email, instant messages, or internet chat rooms. These
attackers are phishing for confidential information, including:
Credit card numbers
SSNs
User logon credentials
Passwords
A phishing attack may look similar to a legitimate message from a known
organization that is familiar to the intended victim. It may also attempt to look similar
to a message from well-known organizations such as banks or large corporations, or
even the company that the intended victim works for.
Phishing messages usually request that the recipients click on a uniform
resource locator (URL) to verify their account details. When the victim clicks on the
URL, a website opens that looks similar to a legitimate site and prompts the victim to
enter personal information to verify his or her identity. In reality, the site that the
victim navigated to is a fake website, often a copy of a trusted site, designed only to
capture the victim’s personal information.
Spear phishing is a targeted phishing scam in which attackers may target a
particular organization. This is a more sophisticated form of attack where a message
might look as if it is from a highly trusted and authentic source. Attackers often
research the targeted organization to make their messages look authentic. This
background research is easy because of the wealth of information on the internet.
Spear phishing messages may use an organization’s logo or terms specific to it in
their attempt to obtain information about the targeted organization, such as logons
and passwords to the organization’s information systems.
Whaling is a type of targeted phishing scam in which attackers target corporate
executives. The federal judiciary circulated an alert in 2008 that warned that some
corporate executives had received a scam email that claimed to be a grand jury
subpoena. However, the email was not a real subpoena. Executives unintentionally
downloaded malware onto their computer systems when they clicked on a link in the
“subpoena” email.
Business email compromise (BEC) attacks are sophisticated phishing scams that
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.target recipients who are responsible for processing payments at organizations. The
goal of these types of attacks is to conduct unauthorized money transfers. The U.S.
Federal Bureau of Investigation reported that BEC attacks led to the loss of over
$12.5 billion across the world from October 2013 to May 2018. 3
FYI
The Morris worm was one of the first internet computer worms. Robert Morris Jr., a student at Cornell
University in 1988, created the worm. His experimental piece of code spread very quickly and infected
some computers multiple times. Ultimately, over 6,000 computers were infected. It also overwhelmed
government and university networked systems. Morris was charged with violating the 1986 Computer
Fraud and Abuse Act. He was convicted and sentenced to a $10,000 fine, 400 hours of community
service, and 3 years’ probation.
Malware
Malware is a general term that refers to any type of software that performs some
sort of harmful, unauthorized, or unknown activity. The term malware is a
combination of the words malicious and software. Malware is usually a computer
virus or worm, or a combination of one or more viruses or worms.
Computer viruses are programs that spread by infecting applications on a
computer. These types of programs are called viruses because they resemble
biological viruses. They copy themselves in order to infect a computer. Viruses can
spread over a computer network or the internet. They also can spread from
computer to computer on infected disks, CDs, DVDs, or universal serial bus (USB)
thumb drives. When the infected virus code is executed, it tries to place itself into
uninfected software.
A computer worm is similar to a virus. Unlike a virus, however, a computer worm
is a self-contained program that does not require external assistance to propagate.
Some well-known internet worms include the Morris worm, SQL Slammer, and
Blackworm.
A Trojan horse is a subset of malware that pretends to be a legitimate and
desirable software file that a user wants. In reality, it is malicious. A Trojan horse
spreads when a user downloads the seemingly legitimate file. While the user
believes a legitimate file is downloading, the Trojan horse is actually loading. This
type of malware is especially prevalent on social networking sites. Accepting virtual
“gifts” on these sites can often expose users to nasty surprises.
Ransomware is a subset of malware that prevents organizations and users from
accessing data or information systems until they pay a ransom. The ransomware
may encrypt data to make it inaccessible, or it may lock information systems, until an
organization pays the attacker to decrypt the data or unlock the system.
Ransomware is not new, but its use across all industries has been growing.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Spyware and Keystroke Loggers
Spyware and keystroke loggers are also forms of malware. Spyware is any
technology that secretly gathers information about a person or organization. Many
users inadvertently download spyware with other programs from the internet.
Spyware hides on a system, where it collects information about individuals and their
internet browsing habits. Cookies set by websites can allow spyware to track the
sites that a person visits. This is especially dangerous because some cookies can
contain website logon and password information. Spyware can slow computer
systems, hog resources, and use network bandwidth. Some spyware programs
install other programs on a computer system, which can make a computer system
open to other attacks.
A keystroke logger is a device or program that records keystrokes made on a
keyboard or mouse. Attackers secretly install keystroke loggers and then are able to
recover computer keyboard entries and sometimes even mouse clicks from them.
They can review the data retrieved from a keystroke logger to find sensitive
information such as usernames, passwords, and other confidential user information.
The student hackers in the Florida A&M example discussed earlier in this chapter
used a keystroke logger, which allowed them to obtain computer access credentials
from data the logger collected. Keystroke loggers can be software-based or they can
be a physical device that plugs into a computer or is hidden in a keyboard.
Logic Bombs
A logic bomb is harmful code intentionally left on a computer system that lies
dormant for a certain period. When specific conditions are met, it “explodes” and
carries out its malicious function. Programmers can create logic bombs that explode
on a certain day or when a specific event occurs. Attackers also program logic
bombs to explode in response to no action; for example, a logic bomb may explode
when its creator does not log onto the target computer system for a predetermined
number of days.
Upset employees sometimes use logic bombs. In October 2008, for example,
Fannie Mae fired an employee from his Unix engineer position but failed to disable
his computer access to Fannie Mae systems until nearly 4 hours after his firing. The
engineer allegedly tried to hide a logic bomb in the computer system during that
time. This logic bomb was set to activate the morning of January 31, 2009, and
designed to delete 4,000 Fannie Mae servers when activated.
Fannie Mae IT professionals accidentally found the logic bomb 5 days after the
former employee planted the “explosive.” The employee was indicted in January
2009 for unauthorized computer access. In October 2010 he was convicted in U.S.
federal court of computer sabotage and sentenced to 3 years in prison.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Backdoors
A backdoor, also called a trapdoor, is a way to access a computer program or
system that bypasses normal mechanisms. Programmers sometimes install a
backdoor to access a program quickly during the development process to
troubleshoot problems. This is especially helpful when developing large and complex
programs. Programmers usually remove backdoors when the programming process
is over. However, they can easily forget about the backdoors if they do not follow
good development practices.
NOTE
The computer worm MyDoom, first discovered in January 2004, installed backdoors on infected Microsoft
Windows computers. Attackers could then send spam email from the infected machines, which helped to
spread the worm. Some versions of the MyDoom worm also blocked access to popular antivirus software
vendor websites. This made it very hard to remove the worm.
A backdoor is a security vulnerability regardless of its initial purpose. Attackers
search for system backdoors to exploit them. Sometimes attackers install backdoors
on systems they want to visit again. Attackers can have virtually unhindered access
to a system through a backdoor.
Denial of Service Attacks
You learned about DoS attacks that disrupt information systems earlier in the
chapter. Attackers do this so that the systems are not available for legitimate users.
These attacks can disable an organization’s web page or internet-based services.
A distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack is another form of DoS attack
that occurs when attackers use multiple systems to attack a targeted system. These
attacks really challenge the targeted system, because it often cannot ward off an
attack coming from hundreds or thousands of different computers. A DDoS attack
sends so many requests for services to a targeted system that the system or website
is overwhelmed and cannot respond.
NOTE
In 2013, Google Ideas and Arbor Networks created a live data visualization of DDoS attacks around the
world. In January 2020 the United States was one of the most popular destination countries for these
types of attacks. To see the map, visit www.digitalattackmap.com.
In a DDoS attack, the attacker takes control of multiple systems to coordinate the
attack. They call this type of attack “distributed” because it involves multiple systems
to launch the attack. Usually the attacker exploits security vulnerabilities in many
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.machines. The attacker then directs the compromised machines to attack the target.
Another term for these compromised machines is zombies. Major websites are often
DDoS attack victims. These systems handle a lot of traffic by design and pose an
attractive target for DDoS attackers seeking to compromise a system’s availability.
Information security deals with these types of issues every day. Organizations
can implement safeguards to help decrease the impact of such attacks.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.What Are the Mechanisms That Ensure
Information Security?
Protecting information is not easy. It is often expensive and time consuming to do
well. The security of a system relates to the time taken to implement safeguards and
their cost. Highly secure information systems take significant time and expense to
create. Alternatively, if an organization wants to implement secure systems quickly, it
must be prepared to spend money. If it wants to keep time and money costs low, it
must be prepared for lower security.
Laws and Legal Duties
Most organizations are subject to several laws. Although this text focuses on laws
that affect information security, these are not the only types of laws organizations
must follow. For example, they may have to follow workplace safety laws and fair
labor standards. Other laws may include those dealing with equal employment
opportunity, hazardous materials disposal, and transportation. An organization must
make sure that it follows all of the laws that apply to it.
Industry sector is a term that describes a group of organizations that share a
similar industry type. They often do business in the same area of the economy. In
the United States, Congress enacts laws by industry sector. These laws address the
protection of data used by organizations in a particular industry, such as finance or
health care. Even the federal government has laws that it must follow to secure
certain types of information. Some of these laws have very specific requirements.
Organizations also must follow general legal duties. For example, executives
must act reasonably and in the best interest of the organization. This means they
must use good judgment when making decisions for the organization.
Contracts
The action of paying someone to do work on your behalf is called outsourcing. Many
organizations outsource IT functions to save money. Outsourced functions can
include data center hosting, email facilities, and data storage.
NOTE
Data centers are not inexpensive. In January 2010, Facebook, a social networking application and
website, announced plans to build its first data center. In 2018 the company reported that it had 15 data
centers, with more planned. The company estimates that it has 2.45 billion active monthly users around
the world, requiring sizable server and data storage needs.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.For example, it is very expensive for organizations to build their own data center.
It is often cheaper for some of them to rent equipment space in another
organization’s data center.
An organization cannot avoid its legal duties by outsourcing functions. It must
enter into a contract with the company to which it is outsourcing. A contract is a legal
agreement between two or more parties that sets the ground rules for their
relationship. The parties use a contract to define their relationship and state their
obligations. Organizations must include specific security clauses and safeguards in
outsourcing contacts to make sure they meet their legal obligations.
Organizational Governance
An organization’s governance documents form the basis for its information security
program. These documents include:
Policies
Standards
Procedures
Guidelines
They show the organization’s vow to protect its own information and that which is
entrusted to it. Policies are the top level of governance documents. A policy tells an
organization how it must act and the consequences for failing to act properly. It is
important for an organization’s management team to support its policies, because
policies often fail without that top-level support.
NOTE
As discussed earlier in the chapter, a policy is an administrative safeguard.
Standards state the activities and actions needed to meet policy goals. They
state the safeguards necessary to reduce risks and meet policy requirements.
Standards do not refer to particular technologies, operating systems, or types of
hardware or software.
Procedures are step-by-step checklists that explain how to meet security goals.
Procedures are the lowest level of governance documents. They often are tailored to
a certain type of technology. They also can be limited to the activities of specific
departments, or even specific users in departments. Procedures are revised often as
technology changes.
Guidelines, which are recommended actions and guides for employees, tell users
about information security concerns and suggest ways to deal with them. Guidelines
should be flexible for use in many situations.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Data Protection Models
One way that organizations put their governance documents into practice is by
creating data protection models. In addition to following relevant laws for certain
types of data, an organization might also protect data based upon its sensitivity to
the organization. Not all information has the same level of sensitivity. An organization
must weigh the sensitivity of information against the way in which it wants to use that
information. To do this easily, an organization might choose to create data protection
models to classify the different types of information it uses.
To create a data protection model, an organization first creates data classification
levels. These levels serve as the basis for specifying certain types of safeguards for
different categories of data. Information that would not harm the organization with its
disclosure might be labeled public information. This would be the lowest
classification of data and would typically have no special rules for its use.
Information that would harm the organization, its reputation, or its competitive
edge if publicly disclosed might be called confidential. Another term that is often
used for this type of information is restricted.
Organizations take many steps to protect this type of information. For example,
they create rules that prevent unauthorized access to it. Other rules might address
the sharing and storage of this information and its disposal.
NOTE
Because businesses compete for customers and money, they must distinguish themselves from their
competitors. A competitive edge is the designs, blueprints, or features that make one organization’s
products or services unique. Protecting competitive edge is one of the functions of information security.
An organization must carefully review its data and put it in the proper
classification level. For example, if an organization has advertising materials that it
freely gives to its customers, it would probably assign these materials to the “public”
category. The organization has no special rules for how employees should protect
this information, so employees are able to freely use, copy, and share this type of
information. The organization also might have design blueprints for its products.
These documents contain the secrets that make the organization’s products special.
This type of material is labeled “restricted.” Employees are limited in how they can
use, copy, or share this information.
Data classification is a common way to think about protecting data. The general
rule for protecting information is that the more sensitive or confidential the
information, the fewer people that should have access to it. Very sensitive
information should have more safeguards, whereas information that is not as
sensitive does not need such extensive protection.
Another part of protecting information involves reviewing security goals in the C-I-
A triad. All organizations must decide which goals are most important to them. For
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.some organizations, making sure their data is available and accurate is the most
important goal. These organizations use controls that ensure that correct data is
always available to their customers.
Military or government organizations may place a higher value on confidentiality
and integrity goals because they value secrecy and accuracy. It is usually very
important to them that sensitive data not fall into the wrong hands. It is equally
important that their data be correct, because key personnel rely on it when making
decisions. These organizations use controls that ensure that data is accurate and
protected from unauthorized access.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.U.S. National Security Information
The U.S. government also classifies its data and specifies rules for using classified
information. President Barack Obama signed Executive Order 13526 in December
2009, which describes a system for classifying national security information. The
Order establishes three classification levels—confidential, secret, and top secret.
The difference between the levels is the amount of harm that could be caused to
U.S. security if the data were disclosed to an unauthorized person.
Confidential describes information that could cause damage to U.S. security if
disclosed to an unauthorized person. This is the lowest data classification level.
Secret describes information that could cause serious damage to U.S. security if
disclosed to an unauthorized person.
Top secret is the highest classification level. This type of information could cause
exceptionally grave damage to U.S. security if disclosed to an unauthorized
person.
The Order also sets forth the rules to follow when using national security information.
Among other rules, it states how the information must be marked and identified. It
also gives instructions on how long it must remain classified. In addition, the Order
specifies when to release such information to the public.
Voluntary Organizations
Individuals and organizations may belong to voluntary membership groups that seek
to promote information security. Group members often have rules that they agree to
follow. These rules usually set forth behavior expectations and are usually ethical in
nature. They sometimes are called a code of practice or code of ethics.
Whole organizations also participate in voluntary membership groups and agree
to follow the terms of codes of conduct. For example, the Internet Commerce
Association (ICA) adopted a code of conduct for its member organizations in 2007 to
provide for fair practice in the domain name industry. Its rules require protection of
intellectual property rights, as well as for members to abide by internet fraud laws,
including laws to stop the spread of phishing scams. You can learn more about the
code at www.internetcommerce.org/about-us/code-of-conduct/.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Do Special Kinds of Data Require Special Kinds
of Protection?
The United States does not have one comprehensive data protection law. Therefore,
many laws focus on different types of data found in different industries. They also
focus on how that data is used. Several federal agencies regulate compliance with
these types of laws.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) regulates some
kinds of health information. The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)
and Office of Civil Rights (OCR) oversee HIPAA compliance. The Gramm-Leach-
Bliley Act (GLBA) protects some types of consumer financial information. The
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) ensures compliance. TABLE 1-2 lists several
important laws, the information they regulate, and the agency that enforces them.
Many of these laws will be further explored in this book.
TABLE 1-2 Laws That Influence Information Security
NAME OF LAW
INFORMATION REGULATED
REGULATING AGENCY
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act Consumer financial information Federal Trade Commission
Red Flags Rule Consumer financial information Federal Trade Commission
Payment Card Industry
Standards* Credit card information Credit card issuers via contract
provisions
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act Protected health information Department of Health and Human
Services
Children’s Online Privacy
Protection Act Information from children under
the age of 13 Federal Trade Commission
Children’s Internet Protection Act Internet access in certain schools
and libraries Federal Communications
Commission
Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act Student educational records U.S. Department of Education
Sarbanes-Oxley Act Corporate financial information Securities and Exchange
Commission
Federal Information Systems
Management Act Federal information systems Office of Management and Budget,
and Department of Homeland
Security
State breach notification acts State information systems
containing protected health
information Varies among states
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.*The Payment Card Industry (PCI) Standards are not a law. Organizations that wish to accept credit cards for
payment of goods and services must follow these standards.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.CHAPTER SUMMARY
Information security is the study and practice of protecting information, which
is important because information is valuable. Organizations need data to
conduct business. Governments need information to protect their citizens.
Individuals need information to interact with businesses and government
agencies, as well as stay in touch with friends and family over the web.
Information is a critical resource that must be protected.
The main goal of information security is to protect the confidentiality, integrity,
and availability of information. Basic information security concepts include
vulnerabilities, threats, risks, and safeguards.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Administrative safeguard
Availability
Competitive edge
Confidentiality
Control
Cryptography
Denial of service (DoS) attack
Distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack
Exploit
External attacker
Information
Information security
Integrity
Internal attacker
Least privilege
Malware
Mantrap
Need to know
Patch
Physical safeguard
Residual risk
Risk
Risk acceptance
Risk avoidance
Risk mitigation
Risk transfer
Safeguard
Separation of duties
Shoulder surfing
Single point of failure
Social engineering
Technical safeguard
Threat
Vulnerability
Window of vulnerability
Zero-day vulnerability
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.CHAPTER 1 ASSESSMENT
1. What are the goals of an information security program?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Authorization, integrity, and confidentiality
Availability, authorization, and integrity
Availability, integrity, and confidentiality
Availability, integrity, and safeguards
Access control, confidentiality, and safeguards
2. An employee can add other employees to the payroll database. The same
person also can change all employee salaries and print payroll checks for all
employees. What safeguard should you implement to make sure that this
employee does not engage in wrongdoing?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Need to know
Access control lists
Technical safeguards
Mandatory vacation
Separation of duties
3. An organization obtains an insurance policy against cybercrime. What type of
risk response is this?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Risk mitigation
Residual risk
Risk elimination
Risk transfer
Risk management
4. Which of the following is an accidental threat?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A backdoor into a computer system
A hacker
A well-meaning employee who inadvertently deletes a file
An improperly redacted document
A poorly written policy
5. What is the window of vulnerability?
A. The period between the discovery of a vulnerability and mitigation of the
vulnerability
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.B. The period between the discovery of a vulnerability and exploiting the
vulnerability
C. The period between exploiting a vulnerability and mitigating the vulnerability
D. The period between exploiting a vulnerability and eliminating the vulnerability
E. A broken window
6. A technical safeguard is also known as a ________.
7. Which of the following is not a threat classification?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Human
Natural
Process
Technology and operational
Physical and environmental
8. What information security goal does a DoS attack harm?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Confidentiality
Integrity
Authentication
Availability
Privacy
9. Which of the following is an example of a model for implementing safeguards?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
ISO/IEC 27002
NIST SP 80-553
NIST SP 800-3
ISO/IEC 20072
ISO/IEC 70022
10. Which of the following is not a type of security safeguard?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Corrective
Preventive
Detective
Physical
Defective
11. It is hard to safeguard against which of the following types of vulnerabilities?
A. Information leakage
B. Flooding
C. Buffer overflow
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.D. Zero-day
E. Hardware failure
12. What are the classification levels for the U.S. national security information?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Public, sensitive, restricted
Confidential, secret, top secret
Confidential, restricted, top secret
Public, secret, top secret
Public, sensitive, secret
13. Which safeguard is most likely violated if a system administrator logs into an
administrator user account in order to surf the internet and download music
files?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Need to know
Access control
Least privilege principle
Using best available path
Separation of duties
14. Which of the following are vulnerability classifications?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
People
Process
Technology
Facility
All of these are correct.
15. What is a mantrap?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A method to control access to a secure area
A removable cover that allows access to underground utilities
A logical access control mechanism
An administrative safeguard
None of these is correct.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.ENDNOTES
1. National Vulnerability Database, NVD Dashboard.
https://nvd.nist.gov/general/nvd-dashboard (accessed January 19, 2020).
2. CNBC, “Ex-Coca-Cola Worker Sentenced to 8 Years in Trade Secrets Case,”
May 2007. https://www.cnbc.com/id/18824080 (accessed January 19, 2020).
3. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Business E-Mail Compromise: The 12 Billion
Dollar Scam,” July 2018. https://www.ic3.gov/media/2018/180712.aspx
(accessed January 20, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:35:29.
