CHAPTER
2
Privacy Overview
RIVACY IS AN area of growing importance for people and organizations. This
growth roughly corresponds with the growth of the internet, which has made it
possible for people to share all types of information very quickly. Organizations
collect and use information to conduct business, governments collect and use
information to provide services and security for their citizens, and individuals share
information to get goods and services. People also share information to network
while looking for jobs and to catch up with old friends. However, this increased
collection of information comes with questions about proper information use.
P
This chapter provides an overview of privacy issues. Because privacy is a very
large field, it is impossible to discuss all of the unique and interesting issues in the
field of privacy. For the most part, this chapter is limited to the areas where
information technology and privacy meet. This chapter also will address general
privacy concepts.
Chapter 2 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
Why privacy is an issue
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.What privacy is
How privacy is different from information security
What the sources of privacy law are
What threats to privacy there are in the Information Age
What workplace privacy is
What general principles for privacy protection exist in information
systems
Chapter 2 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe basic privacy principles
Explain the difference between information security and privacy
Describe threats to privacy
Explain the important issues regarding workplace privacy
Describe the general principles for privacy protection in information
systems
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Why Is Privacy an Issue?
Advances in technology are forcing people to think about how their personal data is
used and shared. To give some examples:
A chef enters her email address on a website to buy a new blender. She then
begins to receive junk email from many different appliance companies.
A school district fires an elementary school teacher after parents complain to the
school principal about unprofessional pictures on the teacher’s personal web
page.
A professor gives students a homework assignment. The students must use the
internet to collect as much publicly available data as possible about a particular
government official.
An organization tracks how many users visit its website each day. It records the
number of times users click on links on the homepage and tracks each user’s
computer Internet Protocol (IP) address. It also tracks the web page that each
user was on immediately before visiting the organization’s web page.
A person buys an MP3 player at a thrift shop. The person later discovers that the
MP3 player contains files on U.S. military personnel, including their Social Security
numbers (SSNs).
Advances in technology change how people live. For example, the discovery of
electricity led to huge societal advances. Today, electrical service is a utility that
many take for granted. The creation of the telephone allowed people to
communicate over greater distances. Today, it seems unusual to find an adult who
does not carry a smartphone that provides both voice and data services.
The rise in internet use also has the potential to change how people live.
According to U.S. Census Bureau data, it is estimated that over 88 percent of U.S.
households had internet access in 2018. 1 You can expect that number to continue to
grow.
People use the internet for almost everything: learning, entertainment, and work.
You can search the internet for almost any type of data. (In fact, almost every
endnote in this book contains a reference to a website.) The internet is also used as
a forum for sharing all types of information nearly instantaneously. The internet
allows media companies to report on world events immediately. Anyone can publish
anything to the world with just the click of a mouse.
However, the rise of the internet has led to some privacy concerns:
Increased access to information
Increased amount of information
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Electronic tracking and monitoring
This increased access to information has some complications. For example, anyone
in the world can view information published on the internet. Therefore, even enemies
of the government can view government information posted online. People can copy
and use articles posted to the internet without the author’s permission. Blogs and
pictures that appear on personal web pages for family and friends to view are
sometimes available to anyone, anywhere.
The amount of information on the internet is also a concern. Larger and more
complex information systems allow businesses and governments to collect more and
more individual data, which has led to the concept of Big Data. Big Data refers to
large and complex data collections. Sophisticated applications review and analyze
data collected from many sources. The owners of these systems can accumulate
large amounts of data about people, which they can use for their own purposes. For
example, they can create highly detailed individual profiles by combining their data
with that of other systems. They also can sell the data they collect to third parties.
Privacy issues are challenged by Big Data collections because the collections
contain vast amounts of information from many different sources.
NOTE
A search engine is a program that retrieves files and data from a computer network. You use a search
engine to search the internet for information. Google, the most used internet search engine, has become
so popular that “to google”—meaning to search the internet for information—was added to the Oxford
English Dictionary in June 2006. 2
People leave electronic footprints in many places on the internet. Internet service
providers (ISPs) maintain logs that track performance information. Websites track
the actions of visitors to the site, and organizations may track and record the internet
and email activities of employees. Service providers of all types back up their logs
and data for disaster recovery purposes. These backups contain personal
information. Many people do not know that their activities are recorded, stored, and
monitored in so many different ways.
Electronic tracking and monitoring also create privacy concerns. Many people
believe that they are anonymous on the internet and that when they surf the internet
or post information their actions are private. They are not.
NOTE
A blog is a personal, online journal. The word “blog” comes from the words web and log. A blog author
uses this online journal to publish comments and personal observations.
Most people want certain types of data kept secret. They believe that if they must
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.share their data, they should at least be able to control how the data is subsequently
used. These beliefs form part of the basis of the concept of privacy.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.What Is Privacy?
Privacy is a simple term that describes many different but related concepts. Writers
spend a lot of time trying to define different types of privacy concepts, which is hard
because privacy issues often overlap. There are two very general ways of thinking
about privacy concepts:
Freedom from government observation and intrusion
Freedom to control one’s own personal information
The rise of technology and the internet further complicates these simple definitions
and our understanding of privacy issues.
At its core in the technology realm, privacy means that a person has control of his
or her personal data. Control means that a person can specify whether he or she
wants to share information and the purposes for which he or she wants to share that
information. And, if the person decides to share information, control means that he or
she should also have a say in how that data is collected, used, and shared. Control
means that a person has a choice about when he or she is tracked and monitored.
Privacy rights are individual rights that exist independent of any type of
technology. Privacy is a large area of study. In particular, this chapter discusses
personal data privacy concerns created or heightened because of an increase in
electronic information gathering, storage, monitoring, and transmission.
FYI
A core privacy right for most Americans is the concept that the government’s power to interfere in the
privacy of its citizens is limited. This means that people and their information must be free from
unreasonable government intrusion. The government must not investigate a person or his or her personal
information without a good reason. Courts spend a lot of time defining when governments are allowed to
investigate their citizens.
Types of Personal Information
The types of information that a person considers private are usually very personal.
However, what is very private information for one person may not be as private for
others. Information that most people generally consider private includes the
following:
SSN or other identification numbers—This includes an individual’s driver’s
license and passport numbers.
Financial information—This includes bank and credit card account numbers.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.This also includes investment and retirement account information. Most people
also consider the amount of money in these accounts private information.
Health information—This includes diagnoses and prescription drug information.
Most people consider information regarding mental illness to be highly sensitive
and private.
Biometric data—This type of data includes fingerprints, DNA analysis, and iris
scanning. It also includes data about a person’s physical or behavioral traits.
Security professionals and security equipment use biometric data to identify a
particular person. Biometric data is special because it is unique to an individual
and cannot easily be changed.
Criminal history data—This includes criminal charges, the outcome of a criminal
case, and any punishment that a person may have received.
Public Records and Privacy
Some types of information that people may consider private is actually publicly available information.
Public records are records that the law states must be available to the public. Government entities create
or file these types of records, most of which are available to the public free or for a small fee. Today most
government agencies make these records available to the public via the internet, which makes it easier for
the government to meet its legal requirements to make them available to the public. It also makes it easier
for almost anyone to access the records. However, people often have little control over the content of
public records and how others use the data.
Laws determine whether a record is public or not. The law designates some records as public because
there is a compelling interest in making them public, such as notifying people about government actions.
Items that are often public records include the minutes of meetings of government agencies, real estate
filings, and court records, including most types of criminal records. Sex offender registration lists are also
public records in most communities, as are professional license records.
Another type of public record is the court docket. A docket is the official schedule of a court and the
events in the cases that are pending before a court. Many federal, state, and local court systems publish
dockets online. Electronic dockets may even include the actual documents filed in a court case, which are
called pleadings. Pleadings can contain data about civil lawsuits and criminal actions, as well as personal
information.
Family data—This includes information about family members and relationships.
Other—This includes any other information that a person wants to keep secret.
Often this type of information may embarrass a person if released to the public.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.How Is Privacy Different from Information
Security?
Information security and privacy are closely related. However, they are not the same.
Privacy is defined here as an individual’s right to control the use and disclosure of
his or her own personal information. This means individuals have the opportunity to
assess a situation and determine how their data is used. Information security, in
contrast, is the process used to keep data private.
NOTE
The U.S. Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) governs access to public records of the U.S. federal
government. Most states have similar laws for the public records of state government and agencies. These
types of laws often are called “sunshine” laws because they shine light onto the inner workings of
government agencies.
Just because information is secure does not mean it is private. Likewise, just
because information was collected in a privacy-protective way does not mean it is
secure. Privacy with respect to information systems means that people have control
over and can make choices about how their information is collected, used, stored,
and shared. Information security concepts and controls are used to carry out those
choices. Privacy cannot exist in information systems without security.
We are still learning about how privacy and information security concepts work
together as our technology and regulatory environment becomes more complex.
Today information security and privacy practitioners need to have a fundamental
understanding of both topics to be effective.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.What Are the Sources of Privacy Law?
Most people consider the right to privacy to be a fundamental human right. Several
different sources define the scope of this right to privacy. In the United States these
sources include:
Constitutional law
Federal law
State law
Common law
Voluntary agreements
Constitutional Law
The U.S. Constitution, the source of legal authority for the U.S. government, states
the relationship between the federal government and the states. It also provides
some authority for certain individual rights retained by all U.S. citizens. For example,
constitutional rights are basic individual rights recognized in the U.S. Constitution.
Most people consider privacy to be a basic constitutional right. Yet, the U.S.
Constitution does not use the word privacy anywhere. However, you can piece
together the constitutional right to privacy from several different provisions. U.S.
Supreme Court cases have interpreted the scope of this right. When we talk about a
constitutional right to privacy, we are most often referring to the right to be free from
government observation and intrusion.
The following amendments to the U.S. Constitution contribute to the right to
privacy:
First Amendment, which reads, “Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the
freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to
assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.” U.S.
Constitution, amend. 1.
This amendment sets forth the right to freedom of religion, speech, the press,
and assembly. Within these rights is the implicit right of freedom of thought, which
has a privacy component.
Third Amendment, which reads, “No soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in
any house, without the consent of the owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to
be prescribed by law.” U.S. Constitution, amend. 3.
This amendment means that the government cannot force people to house
government soldiers in their homes. This gives people a limited right to privacy in
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.their homes.
Fourth Amendment, which reads, “The right of the people to be secure in their
persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and
seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable
cause. . . .” U.S. Constitution, amend. 4.
This amendment truly forms the basis for many of the privacy rights that
Americans enjoy today. This amendment protects against unreasonable
government searches and seizures.
NOTE
The Constitutional Convention adopted the U.S. Constitution in 1787, which applies to all the states in
the country. It is both the oldest written constitution still in use by any nation today as well as the
shortest constitution.
Fifth Amendment, which reads, “No person shall be . . . compelled in any criminal
case to be a witness against himself. . . .” U.S. Constitution, amend. 5.
This amendment provides several protections. Many people know it for its
“right to remain silent.” One interpretation is that it protects the privacy of one’s
thoughts.
Each of these amendments sets forth general elements that are part of an overall
right to privacy. The U.S. Supreme Court first acknowledged that a person has an
interest in being “let alone” in 1834 in a case called Wheaten v. Peters (1834). In
1890, Samuel Warren and Louis Brandeis more fully explained this right to privacy in
their article “The Right to Privacy.” This article referred to a right they called “the right
to be let alone.” Legal cases today still refer to the phrase “the right to be let alone,”
which now includes the idea that people have the right to be free from intrusions by
the government.
The first U.S. Supreme Court decision to state a constitutional right to privacy
was Griswold v. Connecticut (1965). In this case, the Supreme Court found that the
right to privacy was a fundamental right that was present in the Constitution.
Subsequent Supreme Court cases have further defined the scope of this right.
In Katz v. United States (1967), the U.S. Supreme Court held that the Fourth
Amendment of the U.S. Constitution protects a person’s right to privacy. The holding
meant that the right of privacy belongs to the individual and not just locations (such
as a person’s home). In this case, Charles Katz was convicted of illegal gambling.
He had used a public payphone to place his bets, and the government listened to his
telephone conversations through a listening device attached to the phone booth,
even though the government did not have a warrant to listen to the conversations.
The conversations were later used as evidence to convict Katz. The U.S. Supreme
Court held that Katz’s right to privacy was not diminished just because he used a
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.public payphone booth. Justice Harlan, in his concurring opinion in this case, used
the famous term “a reasonable expectation of privacy.”
NOTE
The first 10 amendments to the constitution, called the Bill of Rights, outline specific limits on government
power. You can learn more about the U.S. Constitution and view a high-resolution copy at
https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution.
FYI
In U.S. Supreme Court cases, the Court writes a “majority opinion” that explains the decision of the court.
It also explains how the justices arrived at their decision. A “concurring opinion” is one that agrees with the
court’s majority decision. The justice or justices writing the concurring opinion may have a different
explanation for how they reached the same decision that the majority decided. A “dissenting opinion”
disagrees with the majority opinion. The justice or justices writing the dissenting opinion explain why they
disagree with the majority.
“A reasonable expectation of privacy” is a belief regarding private places that
society recognizes as valid. Courts use the idea of a reasonable expectation of
privacy to determine whether an ordinary person would believe he or she was in a
private place. If a person believes that he or she is in a private place, then there are
limits on the government’s ability to observe or interfere with the person while he or
she is in that space. For instance, people have a reasonable expectation of privacy
in their homes. This is why government agencies usually must have a search
warrant before searching a person’s home. However, people do not have a
reasonable expectation of privacy when they are out on a public street.
In Whalen v. Roe (1977), the U.S. Supreme Court specifically recognized a right
of “informational privacy.” This right focuses on the ability to control information. This
case reviewed a New York law that created a state database of the names and
addresses of patients who were prescribed narcotic drugs, based on mandatory
information provided by doctors. The New York law was challenged on the basis that
it unconstitutionally infringed on a right to privacy.
The Supreme Court upheld the validity of the New York law, noting that the law
included procedures that properly protected the privacy of information included in the
database. However, the Court did not reject the possibility that some types of
government data collection would be improper. The Court wrote, “We are not
unaware of the threat to privacy implicit in the accumulation of vast amounts of
personal information in computerized data banks or other massive government files.”
As early as 1977 the Court recognized the future privacy concerns inherent in Big
Data collections.
Other Supreme Court cases have continued to define the scope of the
constitutional right to privacy. United States v. White (1971) found that there is no
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.right of privacy in information voluntarily shared with another person. In Smith v.
Maryland (1979), the Court found that there is no right to privacy in electronic
communications’ routing information. In NASA v. Nelson (2011), the Court found that
performing background checks on contract NASA employees does not violate any
constitutional right to information privacy. And in Carpenter v. United States (2018),
the Court ruled that the government must get a warrant before accessing a person’s
cell phone location data.
NOTE
Case law refers to the decisions courts make in the cases they decide. Most high-level courts, such as the
U.S. Supreme Court and the highest-level state courts, publish their opinions on cases. These opinions
contribute to the body of case law, which is a part of common law.
Federal Law
Federal laws are the laws that a country’s federal government creates. No
comprehensive data privacy law exists in the United States. Similar to the laws that
regulate information security, U.S. federal laws that address information privacy are
also industry-based. These laws put limits on the use of personal information based
on the nature of the underlying data. Congress has enacted laws to protect various
types of data, some of which are described in this section.
NOTE
The U.S. Code, the official record of U.S. laws, outlines the laws of the United States and is published
every 6 years. The U.S. Code is available online at https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/uscode.
Freedom of Information Act (1966) 3
This Act establishes the public’s right to request information from federal agencies,
including paper documents and electronic records. The law applies to federal
executive branch agencies and offices, which must comply with the law and provide
requested information. There are nine FOIA exemptions; data in these categories do
not have to be provided to the requester. Agencies are required to provide
information to the public about how to make a FOIA request. Anyone can file a FOIA
request. For more information on FOIA, see http://www.foia.gov.
Privacy Act (1974) 4
This Act applies to records created and used by federal agencies. It states the rules
for the collection, use, and transfer of personally identifiable information (PII) and
requires federal agencies to tell people why they are collecting personal information.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Federal agencies also must provide an annual public notice, which must describe
their record-keeping systems and the data in them. The Act also requires federal
agencies to have appropriate administrative, technical, and physical safeguards to
protect the security of the systems and records they maintain.
E-Government Act (2002) 5
This Act requires the federal government to use information technologies that protect
privacy. The Act requires federal agencies to conduct Privacy Impact Assessments
(PIAs), which are done when an agency develops information technology systems to
collect and process individually identifiable information. A PIA makes sure that
systems are evaluated for privacy risks. The law also requires privacy protection
measures to secure the data in the systems. Federal agencies also must post their
privacy policies to their websites.
Electronic Communications Privacy Act (1986) 6
This Act sets out the provisions for access, use, disclosure, and interception of
electronic communications, including telephone, cell phones, computers, email,
faxes, and texting. The government cannot access these types of communications
without a search warrant. This Act is an amendment to the original Wiretap Act and
expands that act’s privacy protections. The Act includes three parts:
The Wiretap Act
The Stored Communications Act
The Pen Register Act
The Act was extensively updated by the 2001 Uniting and Strengthening America by
Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act (USA
PATRIOT Act).
The Wiretap Act (1968, amended) 7
These statutes forbid the use of eavesdropping technologies without a court order.
The law protects all email, radio communications, data transmission, and telephone
calls. Amendments to the original Wiretap Act include protection for electronic
communications.
Census Confidentiality (1952) 8
This law requires the U.S. Census Bureau to keep census responses confidential.
The statute also forbids the Bureau from disclosing any data allowing a person to be
individually identified. The law states that census responses can be used only for
statistical purposes that do not show individual or household personal data. A
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.“census” is a count of the population of a country.
In the United States, people are required by law to respond to the census. People
were allowed to respond to the 2020 U.S. census online, marking the first time that
an online response option was offered for a decennial census. The 2020 U.S.
Census is also unique because many of the deadlines for responding to the census
were extended because of the COVID-19 nationwide public health emergency.
NOTE
The mailbox restriction rule, adopted in 1934, 10 allows only the U.S. Postal Service to put postal mail in a
person’s physical mailbox at his or her home. This rule is the reason why other commercial delivery
services cannot deliver parcels to mailboxes.
Mail Privacy Statute (1971) 9
This law protects U.S. postal mail from being opened by another without the
recipient’s consent. Domestic mail can be opened without consent only if there is a
valid search warrant for that mail. This law only applies to postal mail.
Cable Communications Policy Act (1984) 11
This Act is not specifically about privacy, but it does contain privacy provisions. It
states that cable companies must provide a yearly written privacy notice to each
customer that informs the customers about the cable company’s data collection and
disclosure practices. Cable providers also must ask their customers for permission
before using the cable system to collect personal information. In addition, the Act
requires cable providers to get customer consent before they disclose customer
data. However, consent is not required if the disclosure is required by a court order.
Driver’s Privacy Protection Act (1994) 12
This Act requires states to protect the privacy of personal information contained in
motor vehicle records. Protected information includes any personal data in the
record, such as the driver’s name, address, phone number, SSN, driver’s license
identification number, photograph, height, weight, sex, and date of birth.
The U.S. Congress passed the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act, introduced by
Senator Barbara Boxer of California, in 1994. One of Senator Boxer’s reasons for
introducing the Act was the 1989 murder of a California actor. A stalker obtained the
actor’s address from the California Department of Motor Vehicles, then later went to
the actor’s home and killed her.
State Laws
State constitutions are the documents that form the individual state governments and
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.are the highest form of law for state governments. They apply to the people who live
in a particular state.
Eleven state constitutions recognize a right to privacy: Alaska, Arizona,
California, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Louisiana, Montana, New Hampshire, South
Carolina, and Washington. 13 These state constitutions provide clear privacy
guarantees. The Montana state constitution reads, “The right of individual privacy is
essential to the well-being of a free society and shall not be infringed without the
showing of a compelling state interest.” 14
The California state constitution notes, “All people are by nature free and
independent and have inalienable rights. Among these are enjoying and defending
life and liberty, acquiring, possessing, and protecting property, and pursuing and
obtaining safety, happiness, and privacy.” 15 In general, California has been a leader
among states in enacting laws that recognize and protect the privacy rights of its
citizens.
The State of New York was the first state to add a right of privacy into its statutes
after Warren and Brandeis published their article “The Right to Privacy.” 16 Many
states have since written a right of privacy into their laws.
Other states have recognized a right of privacy through their case law. In 1905,
for example, the Georgia Supreme Court recognized a right to privacy, 17 making it
the first state to recognize, through case law, a right to privacy implicit in its own
Constitution.
State governments also create laws to protect data. For example, all 50 states,
the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands have enacted
breach notification laws. 18 These laws require an organization to notify state
residents if it experiences a security breach that involves the personal information of
the residents.
States also have industry-specific laws that protect certain types of data, such as
financial, health, and motor vehicle information. For example, as of this writing, 26
states have enacted laws to prevent employers from asking employees for their
social media passwords. 19
Common Law
The U.S. Supreme Court did not specifically recognize a constitutional right to
privacy until 1965. However, U.S. common law recognized certain privacy torts as
early as 1902. A tort is some sort of wrongful act or harm that hurts a person. Tort
law governs disputes between individuals. In a tort case, the injured party may sue
the wrongdoer for damages.
Common law is a body of law developed through legal tradition and court cases.
For the most part, the U.S. common law is a body of law and legal principles
inherited from England. Common law changes very slowly. It develops as judges
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.decide court cases.
Four privacy torts still exist today, and most states give either common law or
statutory recognition to these torts. Statutory recognition means that the state has
included the tort in the written laws of the state. The four privacy torts are:
Intrusion into seclusion
Portrayal in a false light
Appropriation of likeness or identity
Public disclosure of private facts
Intrusion Into Seclusion
The intrusion into seclusion privacy tort is the act of invading a person’s private
space. The intrusion into private space takes several forms: It can be a physical
intrusion, but it can also be an intrusion through electronic means, such as using an
eavesdropping device. The intrusion must be highly offensive to a reasonable
person. In this tort, the legal wrong occurs as soon as the private space is invaded.
Understanding what constitutes a private space is important for this tort.
NOTE
The California Office of Privacy Protection, created in 2000, protects the privacy rights of state residents.
California was the first state to create this type of agency, which has an extensive website that includes
privacy tips and consumer information. In 2013 the office disbanded and its privacy-protective functions
moved to the California Department of Justice.
In 2009, the Supreme Court of Ohio found that people have a reasonable
expectation of privacy in their cell phones. 20 This is because cell phones can hold
large amounts of personal data. Other courts have held that people have a
reasonable expectation of privacy in the data stored on their personal computers.
This is especially true if they take steps to protect the data, including encrypting the
data or using a password to protect the computer.
NOTE
A search warrant is a court order. A judge issues a search warrant after the government proves that it has
probable cause to believe that criminal activity is taking place. Probable cause is a burden of proof.
Portrayal in a False Light
The portrayal in a false light privacy tort involves publishing highly offensive private
information about an individual to create a bad impression. The information
published is true, but it is published in an offensive way. This tort often is confused
with defamation, which is another type of tort that involves maliciously saying false
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.things about another person.
The portrayal in a false light privacy tort occurs when a person’s photograph or
image is used to create a bad impression. For example, taking a picture for a
magazine of a person standing outside of a bar might create the impression that the
person is a customer, which might be offensive if the person holds a position of high
respect in the community. In this case, the person photographed could sue for
invasion of privacy based on portrayal in a false light.
In 1993, the Alabama Supreme Court reviewed a false light case. 21 In that case,
a greyhound racetrack took a picture of a group of men sitting together, which was
later used in advertising materials. The men sued for false light. The Alabama court
held that the men did not state a claim for false light because they were in a public
place. The court said there was nothing offensive about sitting at the track. It also
said that the men consented to the taking of the photograph because they did not
move or object when the photographer appeared and began taking pictures. These
types of torts are very dependent on the facts and circumstances of each case.
Appropriation of Likeness or Identity
The appropriation of likeness or identity privacy tort, the oldest privacy tort, involves
appropriating, or taking, an individual’s name or likeness without that person’s
consent for financial gain. This tort often occurs with public figures if their likeness is
used without their permission to sell a product or service. Court cases have held that
likeness includes identifiable characteristics of a person, including his or her voice or
mannerisms.
In 1992, a Samsung advertisement featured a robot dressed in a blond wig and
evening gown hosting a futuristic version of a popular game show. Vanna White, a
game show host, sued Samsung for appropriating her identity for commercial gain. 22
She successfully argued that being a game show host on a popular game show was
her identity. She won the case.
NOTE
The reasonable person standard is a legal concept used to describe an ordinary person. This fictitious
ordinary person represents how an average person would think and act. Courts use this standard to
determine if the conduct that is complained about in a lawsuit is offensive to an ordinary person. Conduct
is wrongful if a reasonable person finds it offensive.
Public Disclosure of Private Facts
The public disclosure of private facts privacy tort involves the publication of
embarrassing private facts. The facts publicized must be so embarrassing that a
reasonable person would be offended by their publication. The disclosures must be
true. Also, they must be truly private. Facts published as part of the public record are
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.not private. Many courts have applied a “newsworthy” defense to this tort, which
allows the media to report on newsworthy incidents without fearing a lawsuit for
public disclosure of private facts.
The Maryland Court of Appeals has held that the publication of a criminal “mug”
shot is not a privacy violation based on the public disclosure of private facts privacy
tort. 23 This is because the mug shot is originally published as part of the public
record.
NOTE
All of the privacy torts can be waived by consent. A person may not bring a tort action against an alleged
wrongdoer if he or she permits the privacy invasion. Those who give permission for use of their likeness,
intrusion into their private space, or publication of facts about them cannot later claim that they were
harmed.
Voluntary Agreements
Protecting personal data privacy grows harder as technology advances. People must
understand their privacy choices in order to protect their data. Governments and
organizations must understand the information that they need to provide.
Organizations use fair information practice principles to help specify how they
collect and use data. However, organizations are not legally required to follow these
principles; instead, they use them to make sure they are properly informing people
about their data collection practices.
The U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare developed the “Code of
Fair Information Practice Principles” in 1973 because there was no federal law that
protected personal data. These principles stated that there should be no secret
record-keeping systems. The principles also required that individuals have a way to
find out if information is collected about them, because individuals must have a way
to correct inaccurate data. These practices eventually formed the basis for the 1974
federal Privacy Act.
In 1980, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)
adopted the “OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flows
of Personal Data” to protect personal data. They are an extension of the 1973 U.S.
fair information practices. The United States was actively involved in creating the
OECD guidelines, which help guide privacy legislation for OECD members. These
guidelines were revised in 2013. The OECD continues to provide recommendations
on how to implement the guidelines in today’s complex technology environment.
NOTE
The OECD was established in 1961 to promote a market economy. There are 36 members. The United
States has been a member since 1961.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.The OECD guidelines contain eight privacy principles:
The Collection Limitation Principle—Individuals must know about and consent
to the collection of their data. This is sometimes known as the data minimization
principle.
The Data Quality Principle—Any data collected must be correct.
The Purpose Specification Principle—The purpose for data collection should be
stated to individuals before their data is collected.
The Use Limitation Principle—Data should be used only for the purposes stated
when it was collected.
The Security Safeguards Principle—The collected data must be protected from
unauthorized access.
The Openness Principle—People can contact the entity collecting their data to
discover where their personal data is collected and stored. This is sometimes
known as the data transparency principle.
The Individual Participation Principle—People must know if data about them
has been collected. People also must have access to their collected information.
The Accountability Principle—The entity collecting data must be held
accountable for following the privacy principles.
Compliance with fair information practice principles is encouraged through voluntary
membership in self-regulating organizations. Organizations often choose to regulate
themselves to keep governments from making laws that would limit their behavior.
Organizations can participate in a seal program to show their compliance with fair
information practice principles.
NOTE
You can read the Better Business Bureau accreditation standards here: https://www.bbb.org/bbb-
accreditation-standards. How do these voluntary standards help protect consumer privacy? What makes
up the fair information practice principles evidenced in the BBBOnline standards?
A seal program, run by a trusted third-party organization, verifies that an
organization meets industry-recognized privacy practices. If the organization meets
the required standards, then it is allowed to display a privacy seal on its website. The
seal, an image that customers recognize, is used to signify a trustworthy
organization. Common seal programs in the United States are WebTrust, TRUSTe,
and the Better Business Bureau.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.What Are Threats to Personal Data Privacy in
the Information Age?
Privacy concerns existed before technology became an issue. It seems, however,
that privacy concerns are more urgent now because of advances in technology. This
is because people often have very little control over how their data is collected, used,
and shared electronically. People are concerned about how much information is
collected about them and how their data will be used later. The rise in electronic
communications makes people wonder how private their lives truly are. This section
discusses some of today’s privacy concerns.
Technology-Based Privacy Concerns
Technology-based privacy concerns are caused by advances in technology. These
concerns arise because of the types of data that can be collected with various
technologies.
Spyware
Spyware, a type of malware, is any unwanted software that secretly gathers
information about a person or system and shares it with an unknown third party.
Spyware poses a threat to personal data privacy because of the nature of the
information and the secret manner in which it collects that data. Spyware can easily
record very personal information such as account numbers, usernames, and
passwords. These programs also can record internet search queries and other
personal data.
FYI
Spyware, keystroke loggers, and adware raise privacy concerns because they are secretly downloaded
onto a user’s computer. People have no control over the software or data it collects. Some users
unknowingly agree to download this type of software onto their computers when the programs are part of a
legitimate software application that a user wants to download. When users agree to End-User License
Agreements (EULAs), they may also agree to install the spyware as well.
Twenty states have laws that specifically address spyware. 24 Utah was the first
state to enact an anti-spyware law, which was quickly challenged by an advertising
company that argued the law unconstitutionally limited its right to advertise. A court
granted an injunction, a formal order for someone to stop doing something, in the
case. In this case, Utah was prohibited from enforcing its new anti-spyware law.
Utah legislators then worked to revise the state anti-spyware law. Current Utah
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.law prohibits pop-up advertising that uses spyware to target the ads that users see
on their computers. The law authorizes the Utah attorney general to prosecute
violations. 25
Adware is software that displays advertising to a user. It can display banner
advertisements, redirect a person to other websites, or display pop-up
advertisements on a person’s computer that open a new web browser window to
display ads. Some types of adware are also spyware. This adware displays targeted
advertisements based on secretly collected user information.
NOTE
A keylogger is a hardware device or program that records all keystrokes made on a keyboard or mouse.
Cookies, Web Beacons, and Clickstreams
A cookie is a small string of text that a website stores on a user’s computer. Cookies
contain text—you cannot execute them the way you do a program file. Cookies are
not considered spyware because they are not executable. A cookie by itself is not
dangerous or a privacy threat. However, other individuals and companies can use
cookies in ways that invade your privacy.
There are two kinds of cookies:
First-party cookies—Exchanged between a user’s browser and the website the
user is visiting.
Third-party cookies—Set by one website but readable by another site.
Third-party cookies are set when the web page a user visits has content on it that
is hosted by another server.
Cookies are used for many things that most computer users consider beneficial. For
example, they can be used by a website to remember information about visitors to
the site. They also can save your settings if you “personalize” a web application that
you regularly use.
However, advertising companies that sell content and advertising to companies
with a web presence often use third-party cookies. Advertisers can track their
cookies over several websites and use the tracked information to create a profile of
each user’s browsing habits. They then direct targeted advertisements to the users.
This is a privacy concern.
A web beacon is a small, invisible electronic file that is placed on a web page or
in an email message that counts users who visit a web page. A web beacon, also
called a web bug, can tell if a user opened an email message and took some action
with it. It can also monitor user behavior. A clear GIF (Graphics Interchange Format)
is a type of image format that is often used as a web beacon because clear GIFs are
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.invisible and very small.
Web beacons recognize several different types of data. When you retrieve a web
beacon, it recognizes your computer’s IP address, your browser, and the time you
retrieved the beacon. Web beacons usually track users by a random identification
number that contains no personally identifiable data.
Spammers sometimes use web beacons to verify whether an email address is
valid. If a recipient opens a spam message with a web beacon, information is
returned to the spammer, which shows that the message was opened. An opened
email message generally indicates a valid email address, which is valuable to a
spammer. That way, they can send the email address even more junk mail.
Web beacons cause privacy concerns because they secretly monitor user
behavior as well as internet browsing patterns. Web beacons let website operators
know which pages a user looks at. They also disclose the order in which the pages
are viewed. Information tracked by web beacons and cookies, when combined, can
potentially identify a computer user, which is a privacy concern.
A clickstream is the data trail that an internet user leaves while browsing.
Movements are recorded as a user moves through a website and clicks on links to
request information. A clickstream is essentially a set of digital footprints that track
an internet user’s steps.
TIP
Most modern internet browsers have privacy settings that allow you to choose whether to accept cookies
from the websites you visit. You also can configure browsers to warn you before a cookie is accepted, and
to block third-party cookies automatically. You should always use the most privacy-protective settings that
your internet browser will allow, provided that you can still get your work done.
Clickstream data, which can be recorded by websites and ISPs, helps
webmasters learn how computer users are using their sites. For example,
clickstream data can be used to determine the order in which users click on web
pages or links on web pages. Clickstream data can be collected and stored. It can
act as the basis for modifying websites for better user experience. Clickstream data
also can make online advertising more effective.
Many of the technologies described so far are used to create an online profile for
a user. Online profiling is the practice of tracking a user’s actions on the internet to
create a profile that contains information about the user’s online habits and
preferences. It can be used to direct targeted advertising toward a specific user.
Targeted advertising is advertising that is designed to appeal to a consumer’s
specific interests.
TIP
You can try to avoid web beacons in email messages by not downloading messages that contain images.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.That is why many email programs prevent pictures from downloading automatically. The email program
lets you decide whether to download images.
A profile can contain very detailed information about the user’s online habits. One
concern with online profiles is that they might contain PII. Many people believe their
online actions should be private. Data for online profiles is often gathered without the
user’s knowledge or consent, which is a privacy concern.
Wireless Technologies
We use several different wireless communication systems every day. In fact, many
adults carry smartphones that incorporate two or more wireless technologies. The
term wireless is used generally to refer to several different technologies that allow
devices to connect to one another without wires. These technologies include:
Radio Frequency Identification
Bluetooth
Near Field Communications
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) is a technology that uses radio waves to
transmit data to a receiver. It is a way to identify unique items using radio waves.
The main purpose of RFID technology is to allow “tagged” items to be identified and
tracked. Sometimes you will hear devices that use this technology called a RFID tag
or chip.
You can incorporate RFID tags for many different uses:
To track pets—A veterinarian inserts a small tag under the skin of a household
pet. You can then identify and track the pet if it becomes lost.
To track inventory—The anti-theft tags attached to clothing in department stores
are RFID tags that can be used to catch and deter shoplifters. A librarian can
place RFID tags in books to ensure that they do not leave the library without
proper checkout.
To track people or their trips—Some proximity card readers use RFID tags to
“unlock” doors to allow the person carrying the card to enter secure areas. E-
ZPasses used by many states to collect tolls on roads and bridges use this
technology.
Most RFID tags do not contain a battery. Instead, the tags are activated when a
receiver is within range and sending out radio waves. The receiver initiates
communication with the tag, which responds with self-identifying data. It is possible
for unauthorized persons to read the information that the tag sends if transmission
between the receiver and tag is not secured or protected.
Individuals have very little control over the information contained on an RFID tag.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.RFID technology poses privacy concerns in that it can track a person’s movements
and daily habits. You do not need an RFID tag inserted under your skin to be tracked
by RFID technology. Cell phones, purses and briefcases, and driver’s licenses or
credit cards can be equipped with RFID tags as well. This tracking can be
completely secret if you do not know that the items you are carrying contain an RFID
tag.
NOTE
The U.S. federal government has been issuing the U.S. Electronic Passport, also known as E-Passport,
since 2007. This passport is the same as a regular U.S. passport, but it has an RFID tag placed in the
back cover that stores the passport holder’s personal information and a digital photograph. It also contains
a digital signature to protect the chip from being altered. The government has taken several steps to help
protect the personal information on the E-passport. You can read about those steps at
https://www.dhs.gov/e-passports.
Information exposure is also a concern. Information contained on an RFID tag
can be exposed to unauthorized individuals if the communication channel between
the tag and receiver is not secure. Individuals usually have no control over these
channels and are unable to take steps to secure them.
Bluetooth, a short-range wireless communication, was designed to replace data
cables that connect devices to one another. Bluetooth connectivity can be found in
many different devices such as laptop computers, cell phones, speakers, fitness
trackers, and headphones. As long as devices are Bluetooth compatible, they can
“pair” or connect to one another. They do not need Wi-Fi or cellular data networks to
connect. However, Bluetooth devices must be near one another to connect. Once
devices are connected, they can share data quickly with one another.
Similar to RFID, information tracking and exposure is a concern with Bluetooth
use. In addition, Bluetooth connections are often visible to other Bluetooth users in
the vicinity. This can make Bluetooth devices easily identifiable targets for hackers.
Near Field Communication (NFC) is a short-range wireless technology that
works only when two electronic devices are about 5 centimeters apart. Similar to
Bluetooth, NFC does not need to use Wi-Fi or a cellular network. Because devices
have to be very close together for NFC to work, concerns about information
exposure are somewhat mitigated. NFC is used for tasks such as making mobile
payments from a mobile device.
GPS Technology
A global positioning system (GPS) uses satellites above the Earth to compute the
location of a GPS receiver. GPS receivers can be incorporated into many devices
and use several different satellites to calculate time and location. For example, they
are used in automobile navigation units. Runners use GPS receivers built into heart
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.rate monitors to help measure the distances that they have run. GPS units are built
into many cell phones to help locate cell phone users in an emergency. Cell phone
applications also use GPS technology to track other users and family members.
GPS technology raises many of the same issues as RFID technology. GPS
technology precisely tracks a receiver’s every step. Thus, a person with GPS
technology enabled on a cell phone can be tracked every minute of every day. GPS
units also are placed in cars. Individuals may not know that their cars or cell phones
have GPS units that track their every move. People have very little control over the
location information that a GPS unit can track and provide.
NOTE
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Enhanced 911 (E911) initiative requires cell phone
carriers to be able to pinpoint their customers’ locations within 100 meters. This allows emergency
responders to reach cell phone users more quickly in a crisis. GPS is one of the technologies used to help
pinpoint customer location.
In 2012, the U.S. Supreme Court held that installing a GPS unit on a car is
considered a search under the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. 26 In U.S.
v. Jones (2012), the government initially got a search warrant to install the GPS
device on the defendant’s car. However, government agents did not follow the terms
of that search warrant when they installed the device. The Court held that, for the
installation of the GPS unit to be valid, police officers must get a search warrant and
execute it properly.
Security Breaches
The Privacy Rights Clearinghouse maintains a list of U.S. security breaches that
involve records that contain personal information. The clearinghouse began
collecting this data in January 2005. As of October 2019, the site reported that over
10 billion records have been involved in security breaches. The list is available at
https://privacyrights.org/data-breaches.
A security breach is a compromise of any security system that results in the loss
of PII. After a breach, unauthorized individuals potentially can access data in the
system. Any organization can experience a security breach. Security breaches can
be caused by direct external attacks, poor internal safeguards, or both. Breaches
can occur within computer systems, as well as when physical security systems, such
as a perimeter gate or fence, are compromised.
NOTE
Security breach fatigue is the idea that consumers receive too many data breach notifications and no
longer take action to protect themselves when they receive a breach notification.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Security breaches are a large privacy concern. Organizations store vast amounts
of personal information. One security breach has the potential to expose the
personal information of a large number of people. This data can be used to commit
identity theft and other types of fraud. Most people are upset when organizations
entrusted with their personal information experience a security breach. Every U.S.
state has a breach notification law that requires organizations to notify customers in
the event of a breach. Customers can then monitor their financial accounts and
personal data to protect them from misuse.
People-Based Privacy Concerns
People-based privacy concerns are caused by people’s actions. These concerns are
raised when people compromise others’ privacy. They also are caused when people
take actions that compromise their own data privacy. Many information security
attacks can also result in privacy violations. They include:
Phishing—Phishing is a form of internet fraud in which attackers attempt to steal
valuable information, usually via email. Phishing scams are a privacy concern for
both individuals and organizations. For the individual, a successful phishing attack
can result in the loss of personal information. For organizations, if an employee
responds to a scam with username and password information, the organization
can experience a large data breach. That breach can involve customers’ personal
information.
Social engineering—Social engineering attacks rely on human interaction. They
involve tricking people to gain sensitive information.
Shoulder surfing—Shoulder surfing occurs when an attacker looks over the
shoulder of another person to discover sensitive information.
In each of these types of attacks, attackers are trying to get data they do not have
permission to have, often in an attempt to get PII to exploit. Chapter 1 discusses
these information security attacks further.
Dumpster diving, another threat to data privacy, involves sifting through trash to
discover personal information. It is an issue because individuals and organizations
dispose of personal information in unsecure ways. Thieves then steal PII to commit
identity theft. Shredding documents before placing them in the trash is a safe
disposal method.
In May 2009, a New York law firm was preparing to move. The firm hired a
document destruction company to help it dispose of old client files, many of which
contained PII on clients. The personal information included medical records, SSNs,
and other personal data. Six dumpsters full of intact client files ended up on the
street. Media outlets reported that several people were noticed rummaging through
the bins and looking at documents.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Social Networking Sites
Personal data privacy is not compromised just by the actions of third parties. People
can harm their own privacy by participating in online social networks, which have the
potential to expose a lot of personal information. Social networking sites are
website applications that allow users to post information about themselves. These
sites promote interaction between people.
Some social networking sites are employment-based and promote professional
networking. They allow users to post their work history and information and connect
with other users in the same industry or across industries. Other social networking
sites are purely social. They allow users to share snapshots of their lives with family
and friends. Users often share large amounts of highly personal data on social
networking sites. Some social networking sites are hobby-based and allow users
with similar interests to share information. Common social networking sites include
Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, Instagram, and Pinterest.
Social networking has two main privacy concerns:
Information (over) sharing
Security
Information (Over) Sharing. On social networking sites, users share lots of
information about themselves in a virtually unlimited forum, such as details about
their daily schedules, finances, and family members. Some social networking sites,
particularly those that are hobby-based, allow for very detailed sharing about specific
topics. For instance, genealogy platforms often contain a social networking function
that can allow users to share ancestry and even genetic data. Oversharing can put
people and their safety at risk. Thieves can use this information to stalk them, steal
from a person’s home, or target them for identity theft.
Most social networking sites allow users to control some privacy settings.
However, users may not be knowledgeable about all of the settings. Sometimes the
privacy settings on social networking sites are difficult to understand. If they are hard
to understand, users may not use them. People often do not realize how much
information is available on the internet through social media sites and that other
users have access to that information.
A fugitive from New York State was caught in Terre Haute, Indiana, in February
2010. Police tracked him down because he posted his workplace on his social
networking profiles. Police arrested him at his job, then posted this message on his
Facebook account: “It was due to your diligence in keeping us informed that now you
are under arrest.”
Security. Another privacy concern about social networking sites is their security.
Many sites allow users to add applications (called “apps”) and other third-party
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.software to their profiles. These applications enhance the social networking
experience through providing games and ways to connect with other users of the
same social network. If these applications do not use proper security practices,
personal information can be exposed. A compromise in an application can disclose
data stored on a user’s profile. Social networking users often have little control over
information used or shared by these types of applications.
NOTE
Creeping means to track someone on social media through viewing all of a person’s social media sites to
understand what is going on in his or her life. Some people consider creeping to be as intrusive as
stalking, which is a crime. Others consider it to be less intrusive and similar to snooping.
In 2018, the Cambridge Analytica scandal showed that the relationship between
social media users, social media platforms, and applications on social media
platforms can be particularly complex. In the scandal, data-analysis firm Cambridge
Analytica was accused of improperly acquiring and using the data of 50 million
Facebook users without the users’ consent. Cambridge Analytica got the Facebook
user data in 2014 through an app called thisisyourdigitallife. The terms of service for
the app said that personal information was not collected, but that was a lie. The
collected data was then later used by Cambridge Analytica to provide voter profiling
and targeted advertising services during the 2016 U.S. presidential election.
Cambridge Analytica was able to access the data by taking advantage of the access
permissions that Facebook granted to applications.
Because of the scandal and its fallout, Cambridge Analytica went bankrupt. In
addition, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) investigated Facebook. In 2019
the FTC imposed a $5 billion penalty on Facebook for violating consumer privacy. 27
The FTC also filed a complaint against Cambridge Analytica. You can read more
about the scandal in the FTC’s December 2019 opinion, located at
https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-proceedings/182-3107/cambridge-analytica-
llc-matter.
Online Data Gathering
The internet has made it much easier to learn personal details about people. People
can search the internet for data on their neighbors, coworkers, family members,
prospective dates, and public figures. Almost every person has some sort of digital
presence. Social networking sites, personal web pages, media websites, and
government public records databases can be easily reviewed for personal
information. Although there are legitimate uses for viewing online personal data, it
also can be used to harass and threaten victims.
Many of the privacy concerns discussed in this section existed before the
internet. They just did not exist on the same level as they do now. Today it is trivial to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.discover personal information about other people. Identity theft is one of the fastest-
growing crimes, because it is becoming easy to find and misuse others’ personal
information. Identity theft occurs when a person’s PII is used without permission to
commit other crimes.
NOTE
Up to 10 million Americans are victims of identity theft each year, according to the FTC. You can learn
more about identity theft at https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/media-resources/identity-theft.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.What Is Workplace Privacy?
Workplace privacy is a term that describes privacy issues in the workplace. Privacy
can be implicated in several ways in the workplace. For example, hiring, firing, and
performance reviews all have potential privacy concerns, and how employers
interact with employees in these matters can have privacy implications.
As a rule, most U.S. employees have very little expectation of privacy in their
workplaces. Very few states have enacted laws about workplace privacy issues,
although some states may have laws relating to general issues, such as telephone
wiretapping. Not all states have considered the impact of those laws in the
workplace.
Employers can use technology, such as electronic communications, to make
workers more productive. Employers provide employees with equipment to use at
work. This equipment includes desktop and laptop computers, cell phones,
telephones, voicemail, email, and internet access. These technologies allow
employers a greater opportunity to monitor how their employees are working each
day. This is called workplace monitoring.
This section will discuss the following types of monitoring:
Telephone and voicemail monitoring
Video surveillance monitoring
Computer use monitoring (including internet access)
Email monitoring
For the most part, workplace monitoring is permissible in the United States. Courts
are just beginning to address the limits of an employer’s ability to monitor
employees. Employers usually are permitted to monitor their employees so long as
the employer has a legitimate business reason to do so. However, employers have
great discretion in determining legitimate business reasons for monitoring.
Workplace monitoring is legitimate when used to measure employee productivity
and workplace safety. It is also legitimate when used to protect employer assets and
prevent theft. Workplace monitoring can also properly be used to:
Ensure that employees are properly using the organization’s sensitive data
Verify that employees are not violating other policies (such as acceptable use
policies)
Protect the company from liability for bad acts committed by employees
Telephone, Voicemail, and Email Monitoring
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Some organizations monitor employee telephone, voicemail, and email
conversations as a part of routine activities. One reason to do this is to make sure
the employees are providing good customer service. Employees have few
protections from this type of monitoring.
Telephone and Voicemail Monitoring
An employer’s right to monitor telephone conversations must be reviewed under
federal and state law. Federal protection for electronic communications is found in
the Electronic Communication Privacy Act (ECPA). It also protects telephone calls.
Under this law, generally the use of eavesdropping technologies to record a
telephone conversation requires a court order.
However, telephone conversation monitoring in the ordinary course of business
may be allowed without a court order. To use this ECPA exception, an employer
must state a legitimate business interest in monitoring telephone calls. Employers
also must show that the monitoring occurred on equipment provided by a
communications service provider.
NOTE
Gartner estimates that almost 80 percent of companies will be monitoring their employees in some way in
2020. 28
Courts tend to give employers deference when reviewing their legitimate
business reason for monitoring. In most cases, the reason is met if the monitoring is
even slightly related to business matters. Employee telephone calls with customers
about services or products that the employer provides clearly relate to business
matters and can be monitored. Monitoring telephone calls for quality control
purposes also is a legitimate business purpose.
For monitoring to stand up in court, an employer must show that the monitoring
took place on equipment supplied by its phone system service provider. The
equipment used to monitor calls must be more than a simple tape recorder. In Deal
v. Spears (1992), the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals found that a recorder
purchased at a consumer electronics store did not qualify as ordinary telephone
equipment. 29 The court held that even though the employer’s reason for monitoring
was legitimate (the prevention of theft), the exception was not met. The monitoring
was a violation of federal law.
Federal law allows monitoring only when the conversation clearly relates to the
employer’s business. Employers must immediately stop monitoring a call once they
determine that it is personal. Personal calls are outside of the ordinary course of
business.
However, employers may always monitor employee telephone calls when the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.employee gives consent. In this case, an employer must provide notice of the
monitoring. It also must show that its employees consented to the monitoring.
Employers can prove that they gave notice by putting their monitoring policy in the
employee handbook. They can show that an employee consented to monitoring by
having employees sign an acknowledgment form. There is no violation of the ECPA
if an employee gives the employer permission to monitor the employee’s call.
Most state laws have wiretap statutes that are based on federal law. There may
be subtle differences from state to state. In Delaware, for example, employers must
provide written notice before monitoring calls. 30 In Connecticut, all parties to the
conversation must give consent before a call can be monitored. 31
There is far less regulation with employer monitoring of stored voicemail
messages. Under federal law, employers that provide electronic communication
services may access messages once they are stored in their computer or telephone
systems, which they can do without notifying employees. If an employer owns the
telephone system, then it may legally access stored voicemails.
Email Monitoring
Email monitoring is very similar to telephone conversation monitoring. The federal
wiretap laws in place for monitoring telephone conversations also apply to
intercepting email conversations. Similar to telephone conversations, real-time email
monitoring may be permitted in some instances. An employer may intercept
employee email using equipment furnished by the provider of electronic
communication services. However, an employer must have a legitimate business
purpose for intercepting email.
Email monitoring does raise some questions that are different from telephone
conversation monitoring. For instance, email is different because it can be stored
indefinitely on the employer’s equipment. Under federal law, stored electronic
communications can be accessed by the organization that provides the electronic
communications service. This “stored communication” exception is very broad. If the
employer provides the email service, then it may properly access stored emails from
that service.
Under federal law, employee consent always permits an employer to monitor an
employee’s email. State laws generally permit email monitoring in a manner that is
similar to telephone monitoring. There may be occasional variations among the
states. In Delaware, for example, employers must provide written notice before
monitoring email communications.
Court cases generally have found that employers are free to read email
messages when the employer provides the email account. These courts sometimes,
but not always, consider whether the email was intercepted for a legitimate business
reason or if it was viewed from its storage location.
Sometimes employees access their private, web-based email accounts from
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.employer-provided equipment. This is a different issue from employers’ monitoring of
work-provided email. Employers who access private email accounts may run into
problems with the federal law, even if the employee has accessed that private
account from a work-provided computer, because the ECPA prohibits employers
from accessing an employee’s personal email account. Courts have found that
employers act inappropriately if they use computer-monitoring equipment to obtain
usernames and passwords to employee personal accounts. If the employer then
accesses those private email accounts without permission, it is considered an ECPA
violation.
Computer Use Monitoring
Employers may monitor employee computer and internet use for many reasons. In
addition to the business reasons already mentioned, employers may monitor
computer and internet use to discourage inappropriate online conduct at work. This
could include discouraging online shopping during work hours or viewing adults-only
websites.
Employees generally do not have any reasonable expectation of privacy in their
use of employer-provided resources. An employer generally is allowed to monitor an
employee’s use of work-provided computers and internet access. This monitoring
includes reviewing files and software on the computer. It also includes tracking
internet use and the web pages that an employee visits.
An employer can monitor computer or internet use in many ways:
Employing keystroke loggers to monitor keystrokes made in a certain period, or
the number of websites visited
Tracking how much time employees spend in software applications provided for
work purposes to measure productivity
Using software programs to measure employee time spent on the internet.
Employers can also block employee access to some web pages to limit the types
of sites that employees can access from work.
There is no federal prohibition against employer computer or internet-use monitoring
when the employer provides the equipment to the employee. Computer and internet
monitoring is permitted in most states. Connecticut 32 and Delaware 33 are notable
exceptions. These states require employers to give notice before monitoring
computer use.
Many questions are unanswered concerning the limits of employer computer use
and internet monitoring. Court opinions provide little guidance. Employees that
challenge employer computer monitoring claim that the monitoring infringed upon
their reasonable expectation of privacy in the use of the work computer. Different
courts in different areas have come to different conclusions.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Some courts have ruled that an employee never has any privacy in employer-
provided computers. Other courts have decided that an employee may have a
reasonable expectation of privacy in employer-provided computers. These cases are
very fact-dependent. For instance, if an employee keeps the computer in his or her
locked office and uses a password to protect the machine, he or she might have a
reasonable expectation of privacy in the work computer. Courts also look at whether
the employer had a written policy that gave employees notice of monitoring.
Monitoring an Employee’s Personal Computer
A potential question also arises when employers allow employees to use their own personal equipment at
work. In United States v. Barrows (2007), an employee brought his personally owned laptop computer to
work, which he connected to his employer’s network. He used the computer at work in an open workspace
area and did not password-protect his computer. While he was away from his desk, another employee
accessed his computer and found illegal materials.
The Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals held that the employee did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy
in his personal computer. 34 There was no expectation of privacy because he had connected the computer to
his employer’s computer network. The court also said the employee had no expectation of privacy in the
machine because he used it in an open area, left it on when he was not using it, and took no steps to
password-protect the machine.
Off-Duty Computer Monitoring
Computer use and internet monitoring create individual privacy concerns. For
example, internet monitoring can be invasive. People use the internet to research
many things, and sometimes very sensitive things. An employer who monitors
internet use might inadvertently learn very personal things about an employee.
Another privacy concern is the monitoring of an employee’s off-duty internet
activity. Employers can easily search the internet for information related to potential
and current employees. They can view employee postings on blogs, web pages, or
email lists, as well as comments made in response to media articles.
Many large employers have fired employees for online comments made on their
own time when those comments are related to the employer’s business. Often the
employer is most worried about social media posts that could harm the employer’s
reputation. For example, in 2004 Delta Airlines fired a flight attendant for pictures
that she posted on her personal website. The flight attendant was wearing her Delta
Airlines uniform in the posted pictures. She later sued Delta for firing her. The case
was ultimately settled, but the terms are confidential.
NOTE
A majority of states limit the ability of an employer to fire an employee for off-duty activity. Most of these
laws deal with activities such as alcohol or cigarette use. These laws state that an employer cannot fire an
employee for use that was both off-duty and away from the employer’s premises.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Video Surveillance Monitoring
Employers may want to use video surveillance to monitor their employees. They can
use video surveillance to protect against workplace theft, as well as protect
workplace safety and monitor productivity.
Workplace video surveillance monitoring generally is allowed if employees are
given notice. Employers must have a legitimate business reason for the surveillance.
Employers must not use video surveillance to monitor places where employees have
a reasonable expectation of privacy. Areas considered private include restrooms,
employee lounges, or private offices. Employers must be careful when using hidden
video surveillance, because it can be a privacy violation if the person under hidden
surveillance has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area under surveillance.
Some states have laws that set limits on what employers may videotape, and
employers can run into complications with federal and state wiretapping laws if video
surveillance also includes audio recording. Audio recording can trigger the wiretap
acts.
Special Rules for Public Employees
Some special rules exist for workplace monitoring of public employees. Public
employees are employees that work for the federal, state, or local government.
Individuals in public employment have some extra privacy protections because their
employer is the government. The federal constitution protects individuals from
interference by the government. State employees have similar extra protections
because of rights provided in state constitutions.
Workplace Monitoring and Employee Privacy
In City of Ontario v. Quon (2010), the U.S. Supreme Court overturned a federal appeals court holding that an
employee’s privacy rights are violated if his employer reads personal text messages sent on an employer-
provided device.
In the case, a California police officer was provided with an employer-issued pager. The police department
had a general computer, internet, and email use policy that stated the use of the equipment was limited to city
business. The police department did not have a formal policy about text messaging. Officers were told that
text messages sent on the pager would not be reviewed so long as the officers reimbursed the department
for charges that went above the service contract amount.
The police officer, in this case, was a heavy user of the pager. He always paid the police department for the
excess use amounts. Eventually, the police department decided to audit pager use to determine whether the
basic service contract amount needed to be increased.
The police department requested transcripts of the text messages sent from the pagers, which the pager
service provider gave the police department. The department reviewed the transcripts of the police officer’s
text messages. The police officer sued, stating that reading the messages violated various federal laws and
his right to privacy.
The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals said that the police officer had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the
text messages sent from his pager. The court based its decision on the fact that the department said there
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.would be no review of pager text messages. The police department appealed that ruling.
In June 2010, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that reviewing the police officer’s text messages did not violate
federal law or the police officer’s privacy rights. The Court held that the police department’s audit of pager
use was not intrusive and was for a legitimate purpose. The Court also found that the police officer did not
have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the text messages.
Although this case deals with a public employee, it does help provide clarity for all employers on the
acceptable limits of electronic communications monitoring. One thing that the case does help highlight is that
all employers must have very clear policies on the use of electronic communication devices. You can read the
Supreme Court’s decision in this case at http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/09pdf/08-1332.pdf.
The Fourth Amendment protects federal employees from unreasonable
government search and seizure. Therefore, the federal government must provide
employees with notice if it intends to monitor the electronic communications of its
employees. Even though the government might have to take additional steps to
make sure that employee monitoring is legal, courts have recognized the
government’s right to engage in workplace surveillance for legitimate business
reasons.
Workplace monitoring continues to be a sensitive issue for both employers and
employees. Employers typically win legal challenges against workplace monitoring
practices, especially if the monitoring is for a legitimate business purpose. To protect
their own personal privacy, employees must assume that equipment provided by
their employers is for work activities only. Employees should not engage in personal
computer and internet activities on an employer’s computer if they wish to protect
their privacy.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.What Are General Principles for Privacy
Protection in Information Systems?
Designing information systems in ways that protect data privacy is very important.
Customers will be loyal to organizations that protect privacy. Organizations must
understand how their customers feel about data privacy. Even though people are
sharing more information than ever before, some feel that their privacy is under
attack. Organizations must keep in mind that people want to control their personal
data.
Organizations can use the fair information practice principles discussed earlier in
this chapter to help define the best way to approach privacy. Many information
system activities impact personal data privacy. Data collection, storage, use,
retention, and destruction practices must be reviewed to make sure that privacy is
ensured at each stage in the data life cycle. The steps in the data life cycle (shown in
FIGURE 2-1) are:
FIGURE 2-1
The data life cycle.
Data collection
Data use
Data storage
Data retention
Data destruction
In the data collection phase, organizations must clearly state the types of data that
they need to collect. They also must determine how they are going to collect data
from their customers. Active data collection practices that are obvious to the
customer should be used. Customers are aware of active data collection practices.
The use of web-based forms clearly indicates to a customer that data collection
activities are taking place. Customers understand what data is being collected
because they are providing the information.
Organizations should avoid passive collection methods. Passive data collection
happens secretly when an organization uses devices such as cookies and web
beacons. Customers may not know that data collection is occurring with these
collection methods.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.Organizations must make sure that they use the data that they collect in ways
that the customer has approved. They should use the data for no purpose other than
what was specified when the data was collected. Information systems will need
configuration so that the collected data is available only for its approved use.
Organizations also must make sure that only authorized individuals have access to
the data. Data must not be disclosed to employees who have no business need for
the data.
Organizations also must ensure that they know how the collected data is used
within the system. Data must not change when processed in the system.
Organizations also will want to include system checks that verify that the personal
data collected remains accurate.
Systems sometimes allow customers to create “accounts” that hold their personal
data. The organization must ensure that it uses appropriate access control measures
for those accounts. These measures protect accounts from unauthorized access.
Organizations should also verify that records are updated accurately.
Finally, organizations must keep track of where collected personal data is stored
in their systems. Appropriate safeguards are needed to protect the stored data.
Organizations may choose to encrypt the collected personal data to protect it from
disclosures or security breaches. Employers also should use safeguards to make
sure that employees do not store the data on removable media. Personal data must
be stored securely to protect it from disclosure.
Organizations should retain personal data only as long as it is needed. Laws and
organizational policies specify the appropriate retention periods. An organization
must dispose of the data when the retention period expires, using a method that
destroys old data in both primary and backup storage systems.
Privacy Policies
Organizations that collect personal data from customers should develop a privacy
policy. This policy clearly explains all the protections the organization uses at each
stage in the data life cycle, informs customers about personal data collection
practices, and explains how the organization uses the data that it collects. The policy
manages the privacy expectations of customers and the security obligations of the
organization.
International Privacy Laws
The United States does not have a comprehensive data privacy law, although many
other nations that conduct business with the United States do have such laws. This
difference can make business transactions hard at times.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.NOTE
The United Nations has a webpage that shows worldwide data protection and privacy legislation:
https://unctad.org/en/Pages/DTL/STI_and_ICTs/ICT4D-Legislation/eCom-Data-Protection-Laws.aspx
European nations recognize privacy as a basic human right. The European
Union’s (E.U.) General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is a revolutionary and
comprehensive data privacy law. 35 The GDPR, which was approved in 2016 and
came into force in May 2018, sets limits on the collection and use of personal data
belonging to an E.U. data subject. The law also grants significant rights to E.U. data
subjects. One of the most famous rights is the right to be forgotten. Under this
provision, data subjects can request that organizations permanently delete the data
subject’s personal information.
NOTE
Under the E.U. GDPR, a data subject is any identified or identifiable natural person. The data subject does
not have to be an E.U. citizen. They just have to be physically present in the E.U.
The GDPR is revolutionary because it attempts to regulate organizations outside
of the E.U. that collect the data of E.U. data subjects. Organizations located in the
E.U. must comply with the GDPR. In addition, organizations that offer goods or
services to people in the E.U. or that collect data on people located in the E.U. also
must follow the law, even if the organization is not located in the E.U. The GDPR has
a very broad scope because it applies to organizations both inside and outside the
E.U. Organizations that fail to follow the GDPR are subject to very large fines.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.CHAPTER SUMMARY
Privacy is a right that people no longer are taking for granted. People want to
have control over their personal information. They want to be able to choose
how third parties collect, use, and store their information. The growth in
electronic communication and data transfer has changed how individuals
view privacy and how organizations must protect it. Organizations must use
information security principles to make sure they respect a person’s
individual privacy choices.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Adware
Biometric data
Blog
Bluetooth
Clickstream
Common law
Cookie
Defamation
Docket
Dumpster diving
Fair information practice principles
Global positioning system (GPS)
Identity theft
Near Field Communication (NFC)
Online profiling
Personally identifiable information (PII)
Pleadings
Pop-up advertisements
Privacy
Public employees
Public records
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
Reasonable person standard
Seal program
Search engine
Security breach
Social networking sites
Targeted advertising
Tort
Web beacon
Workplace privacy
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.CHAPTER 2 ASSESSMENT
1. What does a seal program verify?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
That an organization meets recognized privacy principles
That an organization meets recognized legal principles
That a third party is trusted
That a website does not use cookies
None of these is correct.
2. What techniques are used to create a list of the web pages that a computer user
visits?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Adware, malware, and phishing
Malware, cookies, and web beacons
Web beacons, clickstreams, and spyware
Malware, spyware, and cookies
Clickstreams, cookies, and web beacons
3. Which amendment protects against unreasonable searches and seizures?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
First
Third
Fourth
Fifth
Seventh
4. Privacy refers to a person’s right to control personal data.
A. True
B. False
5. What is the source of legal authority for the U.S. government?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The United States Code
The common law
Supreme Court decisions
The U.S. Constitution
The Declaration of Independence
6. Which of the following is not a privacy tort?
A. Intrusion into seclusion
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.B.
C.
D.
E.
Portrayal in a false light
Appropriation of likeness or identity
Defamation
Public disclosure of private facts
7. The OECD privacy protection guidelines contain ________ privacy principles.
8. Which principle means that an individual should be told the reason for data
collection before the data is collected?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The collection limitation principle
The purpose specification principle
The use limitation principle
The openness principle
The accountability principle
9. What are the two types of cookies?
A.
B.
C.
D.
First-party and third-party cookies
Active and passive cookies
First-party and second-party cookies
Rational and irrational cookies
10. What is a web beacon?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Text stored on a computer user’s hard drive
A small, invisible electronic file
A pop-up advertisement
Executable code
A data trail left by a computer user
11. Employer monitoring of employees in the workplace is generally allowed.
A. True
B. False
12. To monitor telephone conversations, an employer must use equipment provided
by a phone system service provider and have ________.
13. Why is biometric data unique?
A.
B.
C.
D.
It can be used to identify a person.
It is data about a person’s physical traits.
It can be used to commit identity theft.
It cannot easily be changed.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.E. None of these is correct.
14. Which of the following is not a people-based privacy threat?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Social engineering
Web beacons
Shoulder surfing
Dumpster diving
Social networks
15. What is used to ensure privacy?
Biometric data
Encryption
Information security
Monitoring
Online profiling
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.ENDNOTES
1. U.S. Census, “American Community Survey, Presence and Types of Internet
Subscriptions in Household Table B28002,” 2018.
https://data.census.gov/cedsci/ (accessed April 28, 2020).
2. Oxford English Dictionary, “New Words List June 2006,” June 2006.
https://public.oed.com/updates/new-words-list-june-2006/ (accessed April 28,
2020).
3. U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552.
4. U.S. Code Vol. 5, sec. 552a.
5. U.S. Code Vol. 44, various sections.
6. U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 2701.
7. U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 2510.
8. U.S. Code Vol. 13, sec. 9.
9. U.S. Code Vol. 39, sec. 3623.
10. U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 1725.
11. U.S. Code Vol. 4, sec. 551.
12. U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 2721.
13. National Conference of State Legislatures, “Privacy Protections in State
Constitutions,” November 7, 2018.
https://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-
technology/privacy-protections-in-state-constitutions.aspx (accessed April 28,
2020).
14. Montana Constitution, art. II, sec. 10.
15. California Constitution, art. 1, sec. 1.
16. New York Civil Rights Law, art. 5. sec. 50–52 (1903).
17. Pavesich v. New England Life Ins. Co., 50 S.E. 68 (Ga. 1905).
18. National Conference of State Legislatures, “Security Breach Notification Laws,”
March 8, 2020. https://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-
information-technology/security-breach-notification-laws.aspx (accessed April
27, 2020).
19. National Conference of State Legislatures, “State Social Media Privacy Laws,”
May 22, 2019. https://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-
information-technology/state-laws-prohibiting-access-to-social-media-
usernames-and-passwords.aspx (accessed April 27, 2020).
20. State v. Smith, Slip Opinion No. 2009-Ohio-6426 (Oh. 2009).
21. Schifano v. Greene County Greyhound Park, Inc., 624 So.2d 178 (Ala. 1993).
22. White v. Samsung Electronics of America, Inc., 989 F.2d 1512 (9th Cir. 1992).
Did you know that the famous wheel in the Wheel of Fortune gameshow weighs
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
2,400 pounds?
Pemberton v. Bethlehem Steel Corp., 502 A.2d 1101 (Md. App.), cert. denied,
508 A.2d 488 (Md.), cert. denied, 107 S.Ct. 571 (1986).
National Conference of State Legislatures, “State Social Media Privacy Laws,”
October 30, 2018. https://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-
information-technology/state-spyware-laws.aspx (accessed April 27, 2020).
Spyware Control Act, Utah Code, title 13, ch. 40 sec. 13-40-101 to 401 (2004);
repealed and reenacted in 2010 as the Utah E-Commerce Integrity Act.
United States v. Jones, 132 S.Ct. 945 (2012).
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, “In the Matter of Facebook, Inc.,” April 28,
2020. https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-proceedings/092-3184/facebook-
inc (accessed April 28, 2020).
Gartner, “The Future of Employee Monitoring,” May 3, 2019.
https://www.gartner.com/smarterwithgartner/the-future-of-employee-monitoring/
(accessed April 28, 2020).
Deal v. Spears, 980 F.2d 1153 (8th Cir. 1992).
Delaware Code Title 19, ch. 7, sec. 705.
Connecticut General Statutes Title 52, sec. 570d.
Connecticut General Statutes Title 31, sec. 48d.
Delaware Code Title 19, ch. 7, sec. 705.
United States v. Barrows, 481 F.3d 1246 (10th Cir. 2007).
European Union, “Regulation on the Protection of Natural Persons With Regard
to the Processing of Personal Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data,
and Repealing Directive 95/46/EC (Data Protection Directive), 2016/679.” April
14, 2016.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:38:08.
