© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
CHAPTER
14
Risk Analysis, Incident Response, and
Contingency Planning
ISK MANAGEMENT IS an important information security tool. The risk
management process helps an organization understand the risks,
vulnerabilities, and threats that it faces each day. It helps the organization
understand its security posture. It also helps the organization know where to
strengthen that posture. An organization cannot meet its information security goals if
it does not understand its risks. It may not be able to properly protect its resources
and data.
R
This chapter focuses on information technology (IT) risk management. It reviews
fundamental risk concepts and how they are applied. It explains how organizations
use risk management to help them create their other contingency plans.
Chapter 14 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
How to plan for contingencies
What risk management is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.What three types of contingency planning are
What incident response (IR) is
What some special considerations are
Chapter 14 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the risk assessment (RA) process
Describe how to create an incident response (IR) plan
Describe the business continuity (BC) planning process
Describe how to create a disaster recovery (DR) plan
Explain the differences between RA, IR, BC planning, and DR
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Contingency Planning
Organizations must plan for many events. Contingency plans do not focus just on an
organization’s information technology (IT) assets. Instead, the field has grown to
include all types of planning to make sure that an organization can continue to
operate in the event of an interruption, emergency, or disaster. In recent years, the
United States has seen several dramatic events that highlight the need for all types
of contingency plans: the September 11 terrorist attacks of 2001, the northeastern
U.S. power-grid failure in 2003, the H1N1 flu outbreak in 2009, Hurricane Sandy in
2012, and power blackouts caused by California wildfires in 2019.
When organizations talk about contingency plans, they are talking about holistic
plans. These are plans that cover the whole organization and all of its processes.
They identify operations that are critical to the business’s survival and recovery.
These plans must include IT resources and operations. Many organizations store
their data and records electronically. Many of them have grown dependent on their IT
resources and the automated processes those resources provide. Thus, focusing on
how to protect and recover IT assets is an important contingency planning
component. This is especially important for small organizations. For example, some
studies indicate that 43 percent of cyberattacks target smaller businesses. 1
This chapter discusses contingency planning processes as they relate to IT
resources. The different planning processes discussed in this chapter are:
Incident response (IR) planning
Disaster recovery (DR) planning
Business continuity (BC) planning
The scope of any kind of contingency planning is very broad. It can range from
planning for life safety issues to how to conduct business without electricity. This
chapter focuses on only one narrow piece: planning for the security of IT resources.
Although all contingency plans have different goals, the foundation for these
processes is the same. In order to prepare contingency plans, organizations must
analyze and plan for the IT risks that they face. The risk analysis and foundation
process helps an organization understand how it needs to protect its IT resources.
An organization cannot make any contingency plans until it understands the risks to
its IT resources.
FYI
This chapter talks about risk management, incident response, and contingency planning. Risk
management and contingency planning are used to protect IT resources. Incident response is a type of
contingency planning that an organization uses to react to attacks against its IT infrastructure. Disaster
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.recovery (DR) and business continuity (BC) plans are contingency plans that help an organization
continue business operations following a disaster.
It is important to remember that protecting IT resources is not the only goal of a contingency plan. It is not
even the most important goal. Natural and man-made events disrupt thousands of lives each year. The
most important goal of any type of contingency plan is to preserve human life. Continuing business
operations and restoring data are secondary goals.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Risk Management
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) says that risk
management is “a complex, multifaceted activity that requires the involvement of the
entire organization.” 2 Risk management (RM) helps an organization identify the
risks that it faces. It also makes sure that organizations respond to risk in a cost-
effective manner. Organizations use RM to support their business goals.
One of the main goals of RM is to protect the organization’s bottom line. When
risk is realized, it negatively affects an organization’s profits. RM helps an
organization align its information security practices to its business goals. It makes
sure that an organization spends its limited resources wisely and in ways that
enhance business goals. An organization uses RM to plan and prioritize its
information security activities.
For example, suppose an organization has a database that holds customer data.
The database is critical to the organization’s business. It uses the information in the
database to develop products for its customers. The database also holds marketing
information. The organization would be harmed if it did not have access to this
resource. Its development and marketing activities would be negatively impacted.
The organization must protect this database.
A risk analysis shows that the database is at risk because system administrators
share a single administrator account with a weak password to access the database.
This is a vulnerability. Therefore, the database is open to attack. If it is attacked, the
confidentiality and availability of data on the resource are compromised. Attackers
could steal this data. They also could harm the database so that the organization
could not use it. The risk analysis shows that the vulnerability (a single administrator
account with a weak password), together with the threat (attackers) is very critical
given the organization’s business.
As part of its RM function, the organization must review the potential impact of
this risk. The cost of a data breach could be quite high given the type of data in the
customer database. The organization might have to notify its customers about the
breach. It also might have to report the breach to its regulatory authorities. Those
agencies could fine the organization for failing to secure its data. Its customers could
sue it as well. The organization could lose current and future customers. It also faces
its own operational issues if that database is not available for a certain period.
Once the organization identifies the risk and potential impact, it can take steps to
mitigate it. In this example, the organization must reduce the risk posed by a single
shared account with a weak password. It can require its system administrators to
use different accounts, with multifactor authentication, to access this critical
resource. It also can configure its systems to enforce authentication requirements
technically. Finally, it can make sure that it backs up its customer data properly. In
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.this short example, the RM process identified a risk to a resource. It offered different
options for addressing the risk. In addressing the risk the organization was able to
secure an important resource. Therefore, it was able to protect its business
operations and bottom line.
FYI
The RM process described in this chapter is very similar to the risk management framework used by the
U.S. federal government. An organization could easily use that framework to protect its IT systems. The
NIST has created guidelines that federal agencies use to implement this framework.
Each step in the RM process supports an organization’s business goals. The
most basic RM process includes the following steps:
Risk assessment—Identify the threats and vulnerabilities to the organization’s IT
resources. Determine the impact of those threats and vulnerabilities.
Risk response—Use policies and controls to respond to risk. An organization
responds to risk according to its business strategy.
Employee training—Train employees on known threats and vulnerabilities.
Training can help avoid risk.
Continuous monitoring—Monitor the organization’s policies and controls for
continued effectiveness. Update policies and controls that are not effective.
FIGURE 14-1 shows this basic RM process.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.FIGURE 14-1
Risk management process
Description
The RM process and information learned during that process can form the basis
for an organization’s contingency plans. In a basic sense, contingency plans are an
organization’s response to very narrow risk assessments. For example, BC and DR
plans are detailed contingency plans that respond to the risks of natural or man-
made disasters. These risks are discovered during the RM process.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Risk Assessment Process
A risk assessment (RA) identifies the threats and vulnerabilities to IT resources. It
reviews the probability of those threats and vulnerabilities actually happening. This is
called a realized risk. Then the RA reviews the potential harm from a realized risk.
Finally, the RA identifies policies and controls that could respond to the potential risk.
Risk response is the action taken by an organization to reduce realized risk to an
acceptable level. The amount of risk that is left over after realized risk is reduced is
called residual risk.
The RA is a tool in the risk management process that provides executive
management with the data that it needs to make smart decisions about information
security controls. Without an RA, the executive management team has no way to
know if the controls and policies that it implements are needed or cost effective. For
example, an organization could spend a lot of money implementing a control to
respond to a perceived threat. Without an RA, the organization does not know
whether the cost of the control is reasonable given the probability and potential of
the underlying risk. The organization may be making a poor decision if it spends
more money to respond to a risk than the actual cost of the realized risk itself. An RA
helps the organization know where to spend money to respond to and mitigate
information security risk.
There are several different methods for conducting a risk assessment. Some of
them will be discussed in this chapter. In general, all methodologies have similar
basic steps. The basic steps in a RA are:
Inventory the assets included in the assessment
Identify threats and vulnerabilities to those assets
Categorize likelihood of occurrence and potential loss
Document where controls are needed
Risk Assessment Team
An RA team must include people in several different roles throughout an
organization. Even though the RA focuses on risks to IT systems, it is not sufficient
to only include IT personnel on the team. IT personnel may not know about all of the
organization’s critical business processes. For the same reason, it is not enough to
include only business personnel on an RA team. Business personnel may not
appreciate the technology processes that support business operations. The RA team
members should represent all areas involved in a business process workflow.
FYI
Many laws have RA components. The Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) and the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) are two of them. The risk assessments required in these types of laws are very
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.narrowly tailored to the systems and processes that are covered by the law. The RA processes described
in this chapter are more general.
RA team members should include:
Business personnel—These people are responsible for business process
operations. They know the steps that must be completed in each business
process. They also can describe how they use IT systems to accomplish their job
duties.
IT personnel—These people run the organization’s various IT systems. This
group also might include the IT system owner. These personnel understand how
their IT systems work and are responsible for maintaining those resources. They
also would be responsible for implementing any changes to IT systems.
Information security managers—These people run the organization’s
information security program. They have knowledge about information security
threats and vulnerabilities. They also know how threats and vulnerabilities can be
mitigated.
Human resources personnel—These people understand how to deal with
people issues. They can offer advice and input on how to address human-based
threats and vulnerabilities. They also will be able to assist with awareness training
after the RA is complete.
Executive management—These people make sure that the RA team has the
support and resources that it needs to complete the assessment. They can hold
business units accountable for participating in the assessment. They also can
make sure that the RA remains properly scoped to its original goal.
Members of the team must be objective. They must be willing to take a hard look at
an organization’s business objectives and processes for risk potential. They must do
the same thing for IT resources. Members of the team must avoid conflicts of
interest. In the RA context, a conflict of interest is a situation where a member’s
responsibilities as part of the RA team might conflict with his or her job
responsibilities. A conflict of interest prevents the team member from meeting his or
her RA responsibilities.
In many cases, team members are picked because they work in a certain area
that is being reviewed as part of an assessment. These members are helpful in
making sure that the whole RA team understands how these areas work. However,
these members may not be as objective in assessing vulnerabilities, threats, and
risks in their areas. These team members will have to work hard to be objective
throughout the whole RA process. An organization must remove members from the
RA team if they are unable to be objective.
NOTE
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.In general, a conflict of interest is any situation where a person’s private interests and professional
obligations collide. In these situations, independent observers might question whether a person’s private
interests improperly influenced his or her professional decisions.
Some organizations hire consultants to help with an RA. Consultants are not
employees of the organization. They help in a risk analysis by bringing objectivity to
the team. They also help by bringing risk analysis expertise to the process. They can
hurt the team if they do not quickly learn how an organization’s business processes
and IT systems work. They also can hurt the team if they are not respectful of an
organization’s culture.
An RA team is responsible for collecting information about assets and risks. It is
also responsible for reporting the assessment results to an organization’s executive
management.
Identifying Assets, Vulnerabilities, and Threats
An RA must be narrowly scoped. Otherwise, it can grow too large for the RA team to
manage. If it is too large, the team will have a hard time determining the risks that
the organization must address. A good practice is to conduct a focused RA. Rather
than doing an assessment of the organization’s whole IT infrastructure, the RA team
should review one infrastructure component at a time. This way the team can better
manage the RA and produce better overall results.
The scope of the RA must be clearly stated in an RA project plan. RA team
members can refer back to the project plan anytime they are asked to consider a
new system or process as part of the RA. If the new system or process is not within
the scope of the project plan, then the team should not consider it. Executive
management must approve the project plan before the RA team begins to work.
After the organization approves the scope of the RA, the RA team must identify
all the assets that are within the scope of the assessment. This inventory must
include the IT resources. The inventory also must include a listing of the personnel
who run business processes that are in the scope of the RA. It also must contain the
data included in those processes. For instance, an organization decides to conduct a
RA of its email infrastructure. For this assessment, the RA team must consider not
only the operation of the organization’s email servers, but also whether employees
are sending confidential data via email. Depending upon how the RA team defines
the project, mobile devices that send and receive email could be outside of the
scope of the assessment.
NOTE
Many RA projects have a project manager. This person is in charge of making sure that the RA moves
forward in a timely manner. The project manager is not necessarily a participant on the RA team. Instead,
this person helps the RA team meet their project goals and final deliverables.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.The RA team should consider many assets for the inventory. Assets to be
considered include:
Personnel
Data
Hardware and software
Physical facilities
Business process workflows
Current controls that help safeguard any assets
It is important to identify all assets that are associated with the RA project. The
RA team must list assets that are critical to business functions because they also
must identify threats and vulnerabilities to those assets. The RA team must identify
vulnerabilities and threats in order to determine the risk to the organization’s assets.
For IT resources, the organization needs to know how vulnerabilities and threats
might affect confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
A vulnerability is a weakness or flaw in an IT system. Information security is
compromised when vulnerabilities are exploited. An exploit is a successful attack
against a vulnerability. There are many different kinds of vulnerabilities, but they fall
into four broad categories: people, process, facility, and technology vulnerabilities.
Vulnerabilities can be design mistakes. They also can be configuration mistakes.
Threats are anything that can cause harm to an information system. They are
successful exploits against vulnerabilities. A threat source carries out a threat or
causes it to take place against a vulnerability. A threat source can be a person or a
circumstance. Similar to vulnerabilities, threats also fall into four broad categories:
human, natural, technology and operational, and physical and environmental.
Threats can be deliberate or accidental.
Threat sources act upon vulnerabilities. TABLE 14-1 shows examples of
vulnerabilities and threats.
TABLE 14-1 Examples of Vulnerabilities and Threats
VULNERABILITY
THREAT SOURCE
THREAT
Data center has few physical
security controls to prevent
unauthorized access to data
center hardware Unauthorized users (e.g.,
criminals, terminated employees,
curious employees) Theft of data center hardware
Theft of data
Damage or destruction of
hardware or data
Failure to remove user accounts
in a timely manner when an
employee leaves the organization Terminated employees Access to IT resources and theft of
sensitive company data
Destruction of data
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.
Review of data without need to
knowNo access controls for sensitive
files stored on IT resources
Curious employees
Review of proprietary data
Invasion of privacy of other
employees and/or customers
Unauthorized modification of data
Theft of data
The RA team must put forth a good-faith effort to identify as many vulnerabilities
and threats as possible. It can do this in several ways. For vulnerabilities that are
internal to the organization, the team could interview employees in areas that are
part of the assessment. The team also could send a questionnaire to a sampling of
employees to ask questions that are relevant to the assessment. The RA team also
should review the organization’s policies and procedures. The team could use
automated scanning tools to look for vulnerabilities in its IT systems.
The RA team also must learn about vulnerabilities and threats that are external to
the organization. They can review industry guides and can use NIST guidance to
learn more about information security issues and controls. The RA team can review
information from the U.S. government and other industry experts. The SANS
Institute has one of the largest collections of information security resources in the
world. (See www.sans.org for more information.) The team also can review known
system problems listed in the National Vulnerability Database (NVD). (See
https://nvd.nist.gov/home.)
It is not possible for the RA team to identify every security vulnerability or threat.
This is because technology changes so rapidly. For example, zero-day exploits are a
type of exploit that is hard for an organization to prepare for. An organization can
only prepare for zero-day exploits generally. It is hard to prepare for or assess
specific zero-day exploits because they are exploited so quickly after they are
discovered.
Likelihood and Potential Loss
A risk is the likelihood that a threat will exploit a vulnerability and cause harm. The
RA team is responsible for determining how likely it is that identified risks will occur.
The team also must determine the potential loss or harm that the organization could
have if the risk is realized. Likelihood and potential loss can be stated as either a
qualitative measure or a quantitative measure. It depends on the risk methodology
that the RA team uses.
Quantitative Risk Analysis. Quantitative risk analysis attempts to use real
numbers to calculate risk and potential loss. The organization assigns real numbers
to the value of its assets. It also assigns real values to the cost of countermeasures
and controls. One of the greatest advantages of a quantitative RA is that it provides
an objective and monetary-based assessment of cost. It helps an organization
understand both the cost of risk and the cost of controls. This type of RA allows
management to directly compare the cost and benefits with recommended controls.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.One of the greatest disadvantages of quantitative risk assessments is that they are
very difficult to administer.
In a quantitative risk analysis, the RA team must assign a value amount to each
of the organization’s assets. Several factors shape the cost of an asset, such as the
cost of developing it and then the ongoing cost of maintaining the asset each year.
The asset might have value that is hard to measure. For example, it might be hard to
value the intellectual property that goes into creating and developing an asset. It is
also hard to place a value on an asset that provides an organization with its
competitive edge. Although quantitative risk analysis does give an organization
actual money amounts for its assets, there is a subjective element to these values
that is hard to measure. This is particularly true if an asset has intangible value.
After the RA team determines the organization’s vulnerabilities and threats, it
must determine exposure factor. The exposure factor is the percentage of asset
loss that is likely to be caused by an identified threat. For example, an RA team
determines that an organization’s data center is vulnerable to tornadoes. This is
because the data center is located in the part of the midwestern United States
known as “tornado alley.” 3 The RA team estimates that if a tornado struck the data
center, it would be destroyed and the data center’s value would be reduced to zero.
The exposure factor is 100 percent.
The RA team determines that the same data center is also subject to a threat of
fire. The RA team determines that if a fire were to occur, only 50 percent of the data
center would be destroyed. (This is because the data center has a fire suppression
system.) In this scenario, the exposure factor is 50 percent. Exposure factor also is
called likelihood.
Once the RA team determines the exposure factor, it must determine single loss
expectancy (SLE). The SLE is the amount of money that an organization will lose if
a risk is realized. In other words, it is the loss that an organization will suffer every
time that risk occurs. SLE is often expressed as an equation:
SLE = Asset value × Exposure factor
In our data center example, suppose that the data center is relatively small and is
worth $2 million. The SLE for the data center being struck by a tornado is $2 million,
whereas the SLE for the data center experiencing a fire is $1 million.
The RA team also must figure out how many times a specific risk might occur
during a 1-year time frame. This is called the annual rate of occurrence (ARO). An
RA team can use historical data to determine this number, as well as perform
research to understand the likelihood of risks within a certain area. For instance,
police departments can provide information about crime statistics. Insurance
companies can provide information about how often organizations are likely to
experience a serious fire or other devastating incident. ARO is expressed as a
number. It can range from zero (a threat will never take place) to any number greater
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.than zero. A risk that will happen only once a year has an ARO of one.
In our example, the RA team estimates that a fire might strike its data center
once every 20 years. The ARO for that event is 1/20, or .05. The RA team estimates
that a tornado might strike its data center once every 15 years. The ARO for that
event is 1/15 or .067.
ARO is used to calculate annualized loss expectancy (ALE). The ALE is the
amount of loss that an organization can expect to have each year because of a
particular risk. In a quantitative risk analysis, the ALE is the end-result number. An
organization can use this number to determine how much money it should invest
each year in controls to mitigate a particular risk. As a matter of good business
practice, an organization should not spend more than the ALE amount each year on
particular risks. ALE is often expressed as an equation:
ALE = SLE × ARO
In our example, the ALE for the tornado risk is $134,000 ($2 million × .067). The ALE
tells the organization that it can afford to spend up to $134,000 per year to mitigate
the potential loss caused by a tornado. The ALE for the fire risk is $50,000 ($1
million × .05). The organization can spend up to $50,000 per year to mitigate
potential fire loss. Spending more on controls than the ALE amount might be unwise
from a business standpoint because the cost of the controls is then more than the
cost of the risk. It does not make sense to spend more money on controls than the
cost of the risk.
Organizations also can use these formulas to determine the value of a control.
The value of a safeguard to the organization can be determined by comparing the
ALE before implementing a control to the ALE after implementing the control. This
also can be expressed as an equation:
Value of control = (ALE before safeguard) – (ALE after safeguard) – Cost of control
These equations are used in quantitative risk analysis. Many vendors have created
software products that can help RA teams perform these equations.
Organizations often choose to do a quantitative RA because it computes risk in
terms of money value. Sometimes executive management finds this information very
helpful. It gives them concrete values upon which to measure the costs of risks and
the effectiveness of controls. A quantitative risk analysis speaks the language of
business: money.
Qualitative Risk Analysis. Qualitative risk analysis uses scenarios and ratings
systems to calculate risk and potential harm. Qualitative risk analysis does not
assign money value to assets and risk. Instead, it uses descriptive categories to
express asset criticality, risk exposure (likelihood), and risk impact.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.One of the greatest advantages of this method is that it is relatively easy to use. It
does not require RA team members to have specialized financial knowledge. It also
does not require them to deduce the costs of assets, controls, and potential harm.
One of the biggest disadvantages of qualitative risk assessments is that they are
very subjective. The opinions of members of the RA team can highly influence the
results of the RA.
Qualitative risk analysis is scenario-based. In this type of assessment, the RA
team considers a specific vulnerability or threat. The team then considers a scenario
based on it. As team members walk through the scenario, they think about how the
scenario will affect business operations and resources. The team members will use
their own experiences to determine threat likelihood. They can also use industry
resources.
The RA team will create likelihood and impact categories to help them classify
and compare different risks. These categories are usually based on either a numeric
rating system (scale of 1 to 10) or a low-medium-high standard.
Risk exposure categories classify the likelihood of certain risks. An RA team
might use the following categories to determine risk exposure:
Low—Events that are unlikely to happen within a year
Medium—Events that are somewhat likely to happen within a year
High—Events that are likely to happen within a year
Risk impact is determined the same way. Impact categories classify the harm to an
organization if a risk is realized. The RA team might use the following impact
categories:
Low—A realized risk will have little or no effect on the organization. The
organization will experience light disruption to its business processes. It will incur
only low costs related to lost productivity and data and will not experience
reputational loss.
Medium—A realized risk will have a moderate effect on the organization. The
organization may experience moderate disruption to its business processes. It will
incur moderate costs related to loss productivity and data and a moderate
reputational loss.
High—A realized risk will have a severe effect on the organization. The
organization may experience severe disruption to its business processes. It will
experience high costs related to loss productivity and data, and its reputational
loss will be significant.
The RA team also will need a way to compare likelihood and impact levels to
determine overall risk level. The RA team will use the overall risk level to determine
where the organization should apply controls. An organization will not want to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.implement costly controls on a system that has low exposure and impact results.
However, it will want to implement controls where there is a high likelihood rating and
a high impact rating. It must create a method to analyze likelihood and impact rating
levels. It uses this analysis to determine the priority of issues that the organization
must address. TABLE 14-2 shows a generic risk level matrix.
TABLE 14-2 Risk Level Matrix
Description
Organizations use their risk level matrix to determine the priority of the risks that
they must address. TABLE 14-3 shows how the results of a qualitative risk analysis
might look. It uses the vulnerabilities and threats from Table 14-1. In this example,
the RA team would first recommend that the organization implement controls to
remove user accounts for terminated employees in a timely manner. This is because
the risk level for that vulnerability is higher than the others listed in the table.
TABLE 14-3 Risk Level Outcomes
Description
The problem with qualitative risk assessments is that the organization has no
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.way to determine the amount of money to spend on controls. It also has no way of
knowing if it is spending too much on a control relative to the actual loss that it could
have because of a realized risk. For some organizations, this is a significant failure
of a qualitative risk analysis. This is one reason why an organization might prefer to
complete a quantitative risk analysis. TABLE 14-4 compares the features of
qualitative and quantitative risk assessments.
TABLE 14-4 Qualitative and Quantitative Risk Assessment Comparison
Positive Aspects
Negative Aspects
QUALITATIVE RISK
ASSESSMENT QUANTITATIVE RISK
ASSESSMENT
Easy to administer
Does not require formal
knowledge to administer
Calculations are simple
Scope of the assessment can be
changed easily if necessary Measures the money cost of a risk
Very objective, can be used to
make cost-benefit decisions
Easy for executives and financial
managers to understand
No measure of money cost of risk
Very subjective, cannot be used
to make cost-benefit decisions Hard to administer
Requires formal knowledge to
administer
Calculations are complex
Must put effort into valuing assets
(and that value may be hard to
calculate)
Very difficult to change the scope
of the RA
Document Needed Controls
The final part of an RA is to document where security controls are needed. The RA
team does this by reviewing the results of its assessment. In a quantitative risk
analysis, the RA team has a list of risks that it can prioritize by ALE and ARO. The
RA team should review risks with high ALEs and high AROs to recommend controls.
Through a qualitative risk analysis process, the RA team has a list of risks
organized by potential harm. The risk level is based on the classifications that the RA
team used for risk likelihood and impact. The RA team should look at high and
medium risk levels to recommend controls.
An RA team needs to suggest controls to executive management. It must identify
risks that are high priorities. It also should identify controls that can mitigate or
eliminate those risks. If the RA team performed a quantitative analysis, it should
include a cost-benefit analysis for each of its suggested controls. If the team
performed a qualitative analysis, it should show how the suggested control affects
the overall risk level for a specific threat or vulnerability.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Risk Assessment Methods
There are several different RA processes to choose from. Some vendors offer software that organizations
can use to complete RAs. This sidebar describes some of the RA methods you might hear about in the
information security profession.
NIST “SP 800-30 (Rev. 1): Guide for Conducting Risk Assessments” is a qualitative RA method. Any type of
organization can use it. It describes several tasks to be completed in the RA process. You can view this NIST
guide at http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-30r1.pdf.
ISO 31010:2019, “Risk Management – Risk Assessment Techniques,” offers guidance on how to assess risk
in several different ways. You can learn more at https://www.iso.org/standard/72140.html.
Another framework developed in Britain is the M_o_R framework. This framework describes the processes
that need to be put in place to implement risk management. You can read more at
https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/m_o_r.
Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering Institute developed OCTAVE (Operationally Critical
Threat, Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation). OCTAVE is a qualitative RA process that is designed to be self-
directed. It allows organizations to align security operations to business strategy. You can learn about
OCTAVE at https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/library/asset-view.cfm?assetid=309051.
Thomas Peltier developed the Facilitated Risk Analysis and Assessment Process (FRAAP) in 1993. It is a
three-step process based on ISO/IEC 27001 that helps organizations identify risks and threats.
The Microsoft Corporation describes a risk analysis process that contains both quantitative and qualitative
elements in its “Security Risk Management Guide.” It created this guide in 2006. You can learn about it at
http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc163143.aspx.
Executive management reviews the RA team’s report as it makes business
decisions. It will use the report as part of its information security governance (ISG)
activities. The organization must make sure that its response to the risks identified in
the RA team’s report supports its business objectives. The executive management
team shows due care and due diligence when it responds to issues that are raised in
a risk assessment.
Risk Response
Executive management must decide how an organization responds to risk. Risk
response is the actions taken by executive management to reduce risk to an
acceptable level. Executive management must apply the most appropriate controls
to decrease its risk. The organization’s risk response must be cost-effective. It also
should have a limited impact on the organization’s business.
NOTE
Controls reduce the harm posed by vulnerabilities or threats. They may eliminate or reduce risk of harm.
They are also called safeguards or countermeasures.
Executive management must prioritize how it will respond to risks. It should
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.respond quickly to the risks that have the greatest potential to harm business goals.
Executive management must assess each risk individually, as an organization will
not handle all risks in the same manner.
Executive management can use several approaches to respond to risk. They are:
Risk avoidance—The organization applies controls or takes other action to
completely avoid a particular risk. This strategy removes all risk caused by a
particular vulnerability or threat. For example, executive management could
decide that the risks posed by a function in an IT system outweigh the benefit of
that function. It could instruct system owners to disable that function in order to
avoid the risk. The risk caused by that function is completely eliminated.
Risk mitigation—The organization applies controls or takes other action to
reduce a particular risk. This strategy does not eliminate all harm that could be
caused by that risk. Instead, it reduces the risk to an acceptable level. The risk
that is left over is called residual risk. For example, executive management could
decide that the risks posed by a function in an IT system could be lessened if
access to that function was limited. The organization could use access controls to
limit access to that function to only a few trusted employees. The risk caused by
that function is reduced because fewer people have access to it.
Risk transfer—The organization takes no action against a particular risk. Instead,
it passes its risk to another entity that bears the risk of loss. Usually an
organization transfers risk of loss to an insurance company. It can purchase a
cyberliability insurance policy to insure against specific risks. For example, the
organization could purchase insurance to cover losses because of unauthorized
access to IT systems. These types of policies are called technology errors and
omissions policies.
Risk acceptance—The organization takes no action against the potential risk. It
makes an intentional decision to do nothing. Executive management may choose
this strategy if the cost of the risk is less than the cost to avoid, mitigate, or
transfer the risk.
Training Employees
The RM process includes educating employees about risk and how to avoid it. Often
employees contribute to an organization’s risk by engaging in behavior that puts the
organization and its data at risk. Risk can be reduced if employees understand why
certain behaviors are not allowed or acceptable. The organization can use policies to
help direct employee behavior. Risk is reduced when employees behave according
to company policy.
Security awareness training is an important part of any information security
program. It is required to keep employees aware of their security responsibilities. An
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.organization must include security education in its day-to-day routine.
Continuous Monitoring
Organizations must always monitor their information security risk. They also must
monitor the controls that they put in place to respond to that risk. This is an ongoing
process. Because technology changes quickly, executive management must be
diligent reviewing its risk and response to that risk.
NOTE
Executive management can implement administrative, technical, or physical controls to avoid or mitigate
risk.
Many laws require organizations to continually assess their risk. For example, the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) Safeguards Rule requires covered financial
institutions to conduct RAs to identify risks to customer information as part of their
information security program. Covered financial institutions must apply controls to
respond to identified risks. They also must assess their current controls to make sure
that they are effective. Financial institutions also must review their information
security programs on a regular basis.
NOTE
Many U.S. laws require federal agencies and other organizations to engage in regular RA and
management activities.
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), FISMA, and
SOX also require covered organizations to conduct regular risk assessments.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Three Types of Contingency Planning
One of the most important things about conducting an RA is that it forces an
organization to think “What if?” An organization must plan for the risks that it accepts
or cannot avoid, mitigate, or transfer. It creates contingency plans to limit the
financial loss it might experience because of an adverse event. Contingency plans
help to minimize the length of time that services and processes are interrupted. They
also help minimize customer impact because of a serious event.
The three main types of contingency plans are:
Incident response (IR) plans
Disaster recovery (DR) plans
Business continuity (BC) plans
An organization creates these plans to respond to events that might negatively affect
IT resources and business processes. Keep in mind that this chapter discusses
these types of contingency plans from an information security perspective. These
plans can have a much larger scope than just IT.
It is also important to remember that the most important goal of any type of
contingency plan is to preserve human life. Other goals are secondary.
Incident Response Planning
An organization uses its incident response (IR) process to react to attacks against
its IT infrastructure. Having an IR process is important because it helps make sure
that an organization can recover from security incidents. Organizations that are able
to recover quickly from incidents are more likely to be able to continue business
operations. IR is also called incident handling.
NOTE
IR is a reactive term that describes how an organization responds to an incident. Incident handling is a
proactive term that describes how an organization manages an incident. Organizations may use both
terms interchangeably.
IR describes how an organization:
Detects information security incidents
Determines the cause of the incident
Mitigates the damage caused by the incident
Recovers from the incident
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.An incident is any event that involves the organization’s equipment, data, or other
resources. An incident must adversely affect the confidentiality, integrity, and/or
availability of the organization’s data and IT systems. The intent of the threat source
does not matter. An incident includes malicious attacks, as well as the harmful acts
of well-meaning employees. Incidents are usually violations of the organization’s
policies, accepted security practices, or the law.
Organizations encounter several information security threats each day. Each one
of these can be an incident if it adversely affects the security of an organization’s
resources and data. You hear about these incidents in the media nearly every day.
For example, in 2015 a student installed keystroke loggers on computers at his
university to gather username and password information from university professors.
The student then used that information to change his grades in the university’s
computer system. The university discovered the hack through logging and audit
review security measures. In 2018 the student was sentenced to 4 months in prison,
2 years of supervised probation, and ordered to pay restitution to the university for
unauthorized access and damage to its computer network. 4
When the university discovered that records had been improperly modified, it
would have declared an information security incident and formed a team to respond
to the system intrusion. That team would have been responsible for determining the
damage that the incident caused, finding the source of the incident, mitigating the
damage caused by the incident, and recovering the computer systems affected by
the incident.
The student hacker’s conduct was most likely a violation of the university’s
acceptable use policy (AUP). Many organizations have these policies to define
acceptable behaviors for the use of its IT resources. In this case, the student
hackers violated policies and also broke the law.
Based upon what we know about this case from publicly available information,
we know that the university involved did the following:
Detecting the incident—The university used normal information security
practices such as logging and audit review to discover that information in an IT
system had been changed.
Determining the cause of the incident—These same measures, and most likely
computer forensic analysis, helped the university discover that the cause of the
incident was student hackers who had installed a keystroke logger.
Mitigating the damage caused by the incident—The university was able to
restore the changed data because it made regular data backups.
Recovering from the incident—The university restored data and, likely,
hardened its systems to prevent this type of incident from happening again in the
future.
One of the most important parts of IR is documentation. An organization must
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.document every incident that it encounters. That way it can refer to its
documentation if it encounters a similar incident in the future.
Incident Response Team
The IR team is responsible for creating the organization’s IR policy and plan. This
team has a different focus from that of the operational information security
employees who will follow the IR plan and respond to incidents. Often the IR team
will include many information security team members. Similar to an RA team, the IR
planning team must include advisors from several departments across the
organization.
The IR team may help draft the initial IR policy and create the plans that define
the organization’s IR structure. Even though IR is often an information security
responsibility, other departments may need to participate in an IR process. The
information security team may have to interact with many of these departments
when handling an incident.
For instance, the operational team will be involved if there is an incident involving
a physical trespasser to the organization’s data center. The operational team most
likely will involve the organization’s physical security personnel in handling the
incident because the incident included actual trespass onto the organization’s
property. IT personnel will be involved to see if any equipment has been stolen, and
internal audit and legal counsel will be involved if any equipment or data are stolen.
Human resources (HR) personnel could become involved if it appears that the
trespasser is a former employee. Marketing and communications personnel could
become involved if the facts of the incident trigger the laws that require security
breach notification.
The IR team is responsible for making sure that the procedures are in place to
help all of these different departments work together. They must be able to respond
quickly and efficiently in the event of an incident. The operational information
security team needs to know whom they can contact in each department for help.
The IR team’s planning puts this structure in place.
The IR planning team should include information security and IT representatives.
It also should have members from physical security, HR, and internal audit. Legal
counsel should be included on the team to address any legal or regulatory issues.
The IR team will help the organization create its IR policy. These policies are very
specific to an organization’s structure and culture. Similar to all information security
policies, the IR policy is a statement of executive management’s commitment to the
IR process. The policy should state the purpose and goals of IR. It also should
define what an incident is. The policy must set forth, at a high level, the
organization’s operational IR structure. It should define the roles and responsibilities
within this structure. The IR policy also can contain information about how to
measure the effectiveness of the IR process.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.IR Plan Process
Once the organization approves its IR policy, the IR team can continue to define the
IR plan. The IR policy contains the overall IR goals, whereas the IR plan contains the
procedural elements that are necessary to meet those policy goals. Operational
information security teams will follow the IR plan to fulfill their IR job duties. In this
section, the term incident handlers will be used to refer to the operational teams that
respond to an incident.
An IR plan is specific to a particular organization. However, most IR plans have
five basic parts. They are:
Incident triage
Investigation
Containment or mitigation
Recovery
Review
The triage phase is the first phase in the IR process. In this phase, a potential
incident is initially assessed. It is at this point that the primary handler will verify
whether an adverse event meets the definition of an incident. The primary handler is
the person who is in charge of coordinating an organization’s response to an
information security incident. This person is often a member of the organization’s
information security team.
NOTE
The word triage is most commonly associated with the medical profession. It is the process of sorting and
prioritizing patient care based on the severity of a patient’s condition.
The Operational Incident Response Team
An organization often plans and coordinates IR at a high level within an organization. A cross-functional
team, called the IR team, puts the IR plan into place. The responsibility for the daily operations of the IR plan
often falls to an organization’s information security team and other IT personnel.
There are several different roles involved in IR, which are reviewed briefly here. You may find these terms
used in resources describing how to plan and implement an IR program:
Victim—The person or resources that are targeted in an incident. The victim is often the organization
and its IT resources and data.
Attacker—The person or mechanism that caused the incident.
Incident reporter—The first person or mechanism that reports an incident. The incident reporter does
not have to be a person. An automated intrusion detection system (IDS) can be an incident reporter. A
person who notices an unusual incident and reports it is also an incident reporter.
Primary handler—The person who is in charge of coordinating the response to a particular incident.
This person is responsible for making sure that the IR process is documented. Often this person is a
member of the organization’s information security department. If an organization does not have a
dedicated information security department, this is the person with information security job duties.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Secondary handlers—These are the personnel involved in investigating, responding to, and
recovering from an incident. Secondary handlers include technicians, analysts, and operational staff
who take part in handling the incident. Legal counsel and an organization’s internal auditors also can be
secondary handlers. The type of secondary handlers involved in IR depends on the nature of the
incident.
Not all events are information security incidents. The event must have an
adverse effect on the confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability of an organization’s
IT resources or data. For example, it might be an incident if an employee mistakenly
deletes a critical file needed for processing the organization’s weekly payroll
because the employee has compromised the availability of needed data. It might not
be an information security incident if the employee mistakenly deleted a non-critical
file. (Although it certainly would be a business process issue.) The primary handler
decides whether a reported event is actually an incident.
If an event is an incident, the primary handler must classify it, which can be done
in several ways. They can be sorted based on threat source. An example would be
whether the incident occurred because of an internal threat or an external threat.
Incidents also can be sorted based upon the type of vulnerability or threat that is
exploited.
Organizations may use any method for sorting incidents. For example, some
organizations must use guidance prepared by NIST. 5 The U.S. Department of
Homeland Security’s National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center
(NCCIC) uses IR categories that are based on NIST guidance. The NCCIC is the
federal government’s IR center and is sometimes referred to as the United States
Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT). All federal agencies must report
information security incidents to the NCCIC/US-CERT. The NCCIC/US-CERT’s
incident categories are:
Category 1: Unauthorized Access—Unauthorized access is technical or physical
access to an IT system without permission. An agency must report these incidents
even if data is not compromised.
Category 2: Denial of Service (DoS)—Any event that prevents the normal
operation of IT resources such that use of those resources is harmed.
Category 3: Malicious Code—Any event that involves the use of malicious code to
successfully infect, breach, or compromise IT resources. These events include
viruses, worms, and Trojan horses.
Category 4: Improper Use—Any event that is a violation of the agency’s AUP or
other related policies.
Category 5: Scans, Probes, and Attempted Access—Any event where an IT
resource is scanned or probed in an attempt to access or identify the agency’s IT
systems.
Category 6: Investigation—This category is for unusual events that do not fall into
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.one of the other categories. These incidents require more review because they are
odd or potentially harmful.
The classification of an incident may change as the incident is investigated because
the organization learns more about the incident as the investigation progresses.
Incidents also should be sorted based upon potential severity. Severity is assessed
based upon the perceived level of impact to the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of an organization’s IT resources or data. The severity of an incident also
may change. Organizations often classify severity on a low-medium-high scale. An
organization might classify severity as follows:
Low—The adverse effect on the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the
organization’s data or IT resources is limited. A low-impact event causes little or no
damage.
Medium—The adverse effect on the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the
organization’s data or IT resources is moderate. A medium-impact event results in
significant damage to assets.
High—The adverse effect on the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of the
organization’s data or IT resources is severe. A high-impact event results in major
damage to assets.
Classifying the nature and severity of an incident helps incident handlers know which
incidents require priority handling. If the incident handlers must respond to multiple
incidents, classification promotes efficiency. It also makes sure organizations
respond to incidents according to the incident’s potential to hurt the organization.
Classification also helps incident handlers know which incidents to escalate to
management.
Investigation is the second phase in the IR process. During this phase, the
incident handlers learn about the incident and its source, as well as the impact that
the incident is having on the organization. The incident handlers must find all the
resources that are affected by the incident. They also must contact other areas as
needed to fully understand the scope of the incident. The IR policy and plan let the
incident handlers know who they must contact.
The incident handlers must keep management informed of their IR activities. It is
important that management be informed in case there are any regulatory
requirements that need to be considered as the organization responds to the
incident. For example, if an incident involves the disclosure of the protected health
information of more than 500 people, HIPAA requires that the organization notify the
Department of Health and Human Services about the disclosure. 6 Executive
management, in consultation with legal counsel, must make the final decisions about
contacting third parties or the media.
It is also important during the investigation phase for the incident handlers to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.follow the organization’s own internal policies. If handlers are investigating an
incident that might be a crime, it is important that the team follow good evidentiary
practices. If an incident appears to be a crime, the incident handlers must contact
law enforcement according to the terms of the IR plan.
The organization must begin the containment phase almost as soon as an
incident is reported. During this step, incident handlers must take steps to limit the
damage caused by the incident. They will use different methods to contain an
incident depending upon its nature. For example, if the incident is a self-propagating
virus, incident handlers may remove an infected system from the organization’s
network. If the incident is a particularly authentic-looking phishing email, incident
handlers might issue an alert or other notification to the organization’s employees.
The alert would tell the employees not to respond to a phishing email. Incident
handlers might use several different tactics to mitigate an incident.
The organization repairs and recovers its IT resources and data during the
recovery phase. The IT resources and data should be repaired in such a way that
they are not vulnerable to the same type of incident again. This is called hardening.
In addition to hardening damaged IT resources, the organization must harden
resources that are similar to the damaged resources. This makes sure that similar
resources are not harmed by similar incidents.
After an IT resource is repaired, it should be tested for any additional
vulnerabilities or weaknesses before it is put back into production. The recovery and
repair method will depend upon the nature of the incident.
All stages in the IR process must be fully documented. The primary incident
handler is responsible for making sure that each step in the process has been fully
documented. This is important because the IR planning team can review the notes
from the incident handlers to determine whether the IR plan worked as intended. The
IR planning team will want to know which part of the plan worked well, and which
parts need to be improved for the future. During the review stage, both the incident
handlers and the IR planning team can review the documentation to learn:
NOTE
As a general information security best practice, a repaired IT resource should not be tested by the same
person that repairs or recovers it. This is a separation of duties best practice to make sure that
vulnerabilities and weaknesses are not overlooked.
Dollar amount spent in handling the incident
Dollar amount spent to prevent similar incidents in the future
Loss of staff time in handling the incident
How the response to the current incident compares with similar incidents in the
past
Recommendations on policy and procedural changes because of lessons learned
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.from the incident
The review phase is often overlooked because it is easy for an organization’s
employees to go back to their normal operational duties after an incident. The IR
planning team must make sure that the review process is formally required by policy.
The IR process is shown in FIGURE 14-2. As described in this section, many of
the stages overlap with one another. The lines between each stage can be indistinct
at times.
FIGURE 14-2
Incident response plan phases.
Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity Planning
DR and BC plans help an organization respond to a disaster. A disaster is a sudden,
unplanned event. Disasters negatively affect the organization’s critical business
functions for an unknown period. The difference between a disaster and an incident
is subtle. A disaster severely affects the organization’s infrastructure and interrupts
critical business functions. An incident tends to refer to service failures that affect the
confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability of the organization’s data and IT systems.
An incident may become a disaster in some situations.
NOTE
It helps to think of an incident as an event that an organization can deal with during its normal operations.
A disaster is an event that completely disrupts those normal operations.
Examples of disasters include natural threats and deliberate, human-made
threats. Natural threats are uncontrollable events. They include earthquakes, fires,
and flood. Human-made threats include sabotage and terrorist activities. Threats that
can evolve into a disaster also include equipment, electrical, and communications
infrastructure failure. Disasters are not predictable. Organizations cannot control
these types of threats. All they can do is take measures to try to limit the damage
caused by these events. Organizations also can make plans to respond to these
types of events.
DR plans focus on how an organization recovers its IT systems after a disaster.
These plans focus on IT systems only. They are the organization’s immediate
response to restoring critical IT resources after a devastating disaster or event. DR is
largely a function of IT and is part of a larger BC plan.
BC plans focus on how the organization continues its business during and after a
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.disaster. These plans tend to be more comprehensive. They cover all parts of a
business, not just IT systems. These plans address the period between the disaster
and a return to normal operations.
The formal distinction between DR and BC plans is eroding. This is because
organizations rely on IT systems for many of their critical functions. Some
organizations build their whole business model on their IT systems. Today, most
organizations consider DR and BC to be the same thing. You may find the terms
used interchangeably. Most references recognize that a DR plan must be part of a
comprehensive BC plan.
In this chapter, DR and BC plans will be discussed together, unless it is
necessary to differentiate between the two. If it is necessary to differentiate between
the two types of plans, the distinction will be made clear in the text.
DR/BC Team
The DR/BC team is responsible for creating an organization’s DR/BC policy and
plans. Similar to the RA and IR teams, this team must include members from many
areas of the organization. The people who are going to be responsible for carrying
out the plan in the event of a disaster also should be included on the team.
A DR/BC plan is an organization-wide plan; however, specific departments may
have secondary DR/BC plans. These department-level plans must be consistent with
the organization’s DR/BC plan. An organization’s overall DR/BC plan has several
goals:
Ensure that the organization’s employees are safe.
Minimize the organization’s amount of loss.
Recover critical business systems and infrastructure within a certain period.
Resume critical business operations within a certain period.
Repair or replace damaged facilities.
Return to normal operations.
The DR/BC team will help the organization create its DR/BC policy. These policies
are very specific to an organization’s structure and culture.
A DR/BC team must include members from IT, HR, executive management,
physical security, and legal counsel. It also must include the managers or owners of
critical business processes. The team also should include the employees, and their
backups, who will be in charge of directing the organization’s activities in a real
disaster. It is important that backup personnel be included in case the people with
primary DR/BC responsibilities are not available in a disaster.
One thing to keep in mind for DR/BC plans is that disasters are not always limited
to the organization. A disaster in a geographic region may mean that both the
organization and its employees will be affected by it. Employees must personally
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.respond to the same disaster. If employees must respond to the disaster at home
with their own families, they may not be in a position to help the organization
respond to the disaster as well. An organizational DR/BC plan must acknowledge
this risk.
DR/BC Plan Development
Many of the steps in the DR/BC planning process are similar to the RA and IR
planning processes. Contingency planning is a part of risk management. The steps
in the DR/BC planning process are:
Develop the DR/BC policy.
Conduct a business impact analysis.
Identify threats and potential controls.
Determine recovery strategy.
Design and maintain the plan.
The DR/BC team must make sure that policies and plans are in place that help the
organization complete these steps. The DR/BC policy is a statement of executive
management’s commitment to the BC planning that should state the purpose and
goals of DR/BC. The policy should define DR/BC roles and responsibilities. The
policy should include the organization’s resource requirements for any DR/BC plan.
After a DR/BC policy is approved, the DR/BC team must conduct a business
impact analysis (BIA). A BIA identifies key business operations. It also identifies the
resources that support those operations. The DR/BC team uses a BIA to estimate
how long those critical operations and resources can be offline before the
organization’s entire business is negatively affected.
To complete a BIA, the DR/BC team must:
Identify critical business processes—The BR/DR team must identify the
organization’s critical business processes. There is no master list of processes
that are critical to all organizations. Each organization is different. Some critical
processes might include payroll, attendance scheduling, and customer service
activities.
Identify IT resources that support critical business processes—The BR/DR team
must identify the resources that support its critical business processes. Resources
can include the organization’s communications infrastructure. They also can
include individual IT systems and components.
Determine how long IT resources can be offline—The DR/BC team must identify
the effect on business organizations if a resource is disrupted or damaged and a
critical process cannot run.
Determine recovery criticality—The DR/BC team must prioritize how the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.organization will handle IT resources and business processes following a disaster.
A BIA closely resembles a risk assessment. Many of the same tools and techniques
used in an RA are used to complete a BIA. The team can interview employees
throughout the organization to learn about its many business processes. The team
also could send a questionnaire to a sampling of employees. The questionnaire
could ask questions about business processes and resources.
Once the DR/BC team determines the organization’s critical processes and
resources, it must figure out how long those processes and resources can be offline
before the organization experiences irreparable harm. This period is called
maximum tolerable downtime (MTD). Some processes and systems are so critical
that they can be down only for a few minutes before an organization suffers
irreparable damage. If these processes are offline longer than the MTD, the
organization might fail. Processes and systems that are not essential to business
operations may have an MTD of days or weeks.
The DR/BC team must determine the order in which IT resources will be
reviewed and restored following the disaster. It uses the results of the BIA to make
this determination. If an organization must resume a business process within a short
period, it will need to make sure that it can put people and processes in place to
recover the process within that period. The priority list of processes and resources
helps executive management make recovery strategy decisions.
NOTE
Some resources use the term maximum acceptable outage (MAO) in place of MTD. The two terms mean
the same thing.
After the BIA is complete, the DR/BC team must identify threats and potential
controls. This step is very similar to a risk assessment. In fact, the organization may
have completed this exercise as part of an RA. If so, the DR/BC team can use those
results at this step. The DR/BC team must identify the threats to the organization
that have disaster potential. It also must identify potential controls to respond to
those threats. These controls try to reduce the possibility of the organization
experiencing a disaster. If a disaster cannot be avoided, these controls may lessen
the amount of damage to the organization.
For example, an organization’s data center may be located in an area prone to
tornadoes. If the organization cannot move its data center, it may try to fortify it. The
organization might try to make the data center more resistant to wind-related
damage to protect its business processes.
Some common preventative controls that an organization can implement include:
Fire detection and suppression systems
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Installing backup generators or uninterruptible power supplies
Offsite storage of system backup media
Frequent backups of critical data
Extra equipment inventories for critical IT resources
The DR/BC team also must determine a recovery strategy. It consults with executive
management to do this. An organization’s recovery strategy addresses the
resources that it must recover after a disaster and the order in which those
resources must be recovered. An organization will have to consider a wide variety of
recovery strategies.
An organization must prepare recovery strategies for its:
Critical business processes—The organization must plan for recovering its
business processes. It must understand all the workflow steps needed to complete
a business process. It must know the resources and supplies needed to support
these processes.
Facilities and supplies—The organization must make sure that it has a plan to
restore its main facility. It also must restore the utilities needed to support that
facility. Utilities include telecommunications and electrical infrastructure.
Backup Site Options
It is rare when an organization experiences a disaster that forces it out of its main facility for a long time.
However, the organization still must plan for this possibility. It must have a location to which it can move its
operations, which is called a backup site. An organization has several planning options for a backup site. It
is important for you to know the differences between them.
A mirrored site, a fully operational backup site, actively runs the organization’s IT processes in parallel
with the organization’s main facility. In this way, a mirrored site is a redundant facility. An organization can
immediately transfer all of its IT operations to the mirrored site, which is already staffed with the
organization’s employees. This is the most expensive type of backup site to maintain. This type of backup
site is appropriate for organizations that have a low MTD for critical processes. This type of backup site
supports high availability.
A hot site is an operational backup site that has all of the equipment and infrastructure that an
organization needs to continue its business operations. The equipment in the hot site is fully compatible
with the organization’s main facility. A hot site can become operational within minutes to hours after a
disaster. However, it is not staffed with people, and it does not process data in parallel with the main
facility. If needed, the organization must bring data backups to the hot site facility. A hot site, although
expensive to maintain, may be the best choice for an organization that can afford some, but not a lot, of
downtime.
A warm site is a compromise between a hot site and a cold site. A warm site is space that contains some,
but not all, of the equipment that an organization will need to continue operations in the event of a
disaster. The warm site is partially prepared for operations, in that it has electricity and network
connectivity. This type of site is more expensive than a cold site.
A cold site is a backup site that is little more than reserved space. It is the most inexpensive type of
backup site, as it does not have any equipment or hardware set up. Although it will have electrical service,
it most likely will not have network connectivity. It can take weeks for an organization to get a cold site
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.ready for business operations. An organization will have to acquire equipment and infrastructure to make
the site operational.
Employee environment—The organization must have plans in place for
supporting its employees during a disaster. This means making sure that it has
ways to communicate with employees during a disaster. The organization also
must have plans in place to manage employee responsibilities until the
organization can return to normal operations.
IT operations—The organization must have plans in place to resume its IT
operations. This means making sure that infrastructure components are in place
so that business can resume. The organization will want to have contracts with its
vendors so that it can get replacement equipment quickly.
Data recovery—The organization must have a way to recover its data and
operational information, as well as retrieve data from offsite storage facilities. It
also must have plans to retrieve paper-based information from its main facility.
A recovery strategy also must include the people that will implement it. A team with
specialized skills and knowledge must head each recovery area. For example, the
organization’s storage administrators should serve on the team in charge of data
recovery. Each team must have a leader.
Once an organization develops its DR/BC plan, it must monitor and update it in
response to changing conditions. An organization must update its plan anytime its
business processes or technology change. It must update the plan any time key
personnel change. Organizations put contingency plans in place so that they can
respond to events that adversely affect them. It is not enough to create a plan and
put it away on a shelf for use “just in case.”
A DR/BC plan helps an organization respond to a disaster. These plans are an
important part of an organization’s risk management activities. The DR/BC planning
process is shown in FIGURE 14-3.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.FIGURE 14-3
DR/BC planning process.
Description
Testing the Plan
Organizations must test their contingency plans on a regular basis to make sure that
the plan accounts for all critical business functions and processes. It also should test
its contingency plans to make sure that the plans do not have any deficiencies. An
organization must correct plan deficiencies.
Contingency plan testing has several objectives. They include:
Help employees become familiar with and accept the DR/BC plan.
Train employees how to respond during an emergency.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Identify weaknesses or deficiencies within the plan.
Make sure that all of the checklists and procedures needed to implement the plan
are created and in place.
Make sure that all the resources and supplies needed to implement the plan are in
place and are operational.
Make sure that all communications mechanisms work properly.
Make sure that all DR/BC teams are able to work well together.
NOTE
In the DR/BC plan context, a single point of failure is a step in the plan or an assumption within the plan
that is critical to the performance of the entire plan. If that step or the assumption fails, then a critical
portion of the plan, or the entire plan, could fail. Identifying single points of failure is a critical part of testing
contingency plans.
Through testing, an organization can learn that it is missing key business process
areas. It also can identify single points of failure within the plan and take steps to
correct them. Any changes that are made to the DR/BC plan as part of the test
review must be fully documented. Changes to the plan also must be communicated
to all members of the organization.
There are five ways to test DR/BC plans. These tests also could be used to test
an organization’s IR capability.
A checklist test is one of the most basic types of DR/BC tests. In this type of
test, the DR/BC team makes sure that supplies and inventory items that are needed
to execute the DR/BC plan are in place. This type of test makes sure that sufficient
supplies are stored at backup facilities. It also makes sure that the organization has
enough reference copies of the DR/BC plan and that all copies have current
information.
A walk-through test is often used with a checklist test. In this type of test, the
DR/BC team “walks through” the entire DR/BC plan. They study each area of the
plan to make sure that all of the assumptions and tasks stated in it are correct. This
type of test also helps the people who are responsible for executing the DR/BC plan
become very familiar with it. This type of test is sometimes called a tabletop walk-
through test or tabletop test because the members of the team will sit around a table
as they study the plan.
A simulation test is a more realistic version of a walk-through test. In this type of
test, the organization role-plays a disaster scenario. The scope of these types of
tests has to be carefully defined so that they do not negatively affect normal
business activities. This test is designed to measure the effectiveness of employee
notification procedures. Depending upon the scope of the test, an organization might
try to measure how fast it can set up its backup site. It also could measure how fast
its vendors can provide additional equipment.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.FYI
Organizations with critical business functions that affect many customers tend to be serious about DR/BC
planning and testing. AT&T has a Network Disaster Recovery Team, whichis responsible for restoring
voice and data network communications to an area that is affected by a disaster. The team conducts four
DR exercises each year. It was deployed in 2017 to respond to wildfires in California. You can read about
the team’s efforts at https://www.business.att.com/solutions/family/network-services/network-disaster-
recovery.html.
A parallel test is designed to test the organization’s IT recovery processes. In
this type of test, the organization tests its ability to recover its IT systems and its
business data. The organization brings its backup sites online. It will then use
historical business data to test how those systems operate. In this test, the
organization tests both data processing and data recovery. During the test, the
organization continues normal business operations at its main facility. The test is
conducted using historical data.
A full interruption test is designed to test the organization’s entire DR/BC plan.
This test involves a scenario that destroys or severely damages the organization’s
main facility. The organization must transfer all business and IT functions to its
backup site. In this type of test, all normal business operations stop. Operations are
shut down at the main site. They must be transferred to the backup site using the
processes stated in the DR/BC plan.
A full interruption test is the most expensive kind of contingency plan test. It can
help the organization learn a lot about its DR/BC plan’s effectiveness. However, it
also has the potential to negatively affect the organization’s business. If the
organization cannot get business operations resumed at the backup site, then the
test itself can create a disaster situation for the organization. Organizations
undertake these types of tests with great care.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Special Considerations
Risk management and contingency planning activities make good business sense.
They help an organization prepare for threats and events that harm its ability to meet
its business goals. Organizations that engage in these activities understand their
information security posture and know where they have weaknesses. They also
know the threats to the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of their IT resources
and data.
Addressing Compliance Requirements
For many organizations, RM and contingency planning are not just good business
practices. Sometimes they are required by law. Many laws require the organizations
they cover to complete risk assessments and create contingency plans. TABLE 14-5
reviews some laws that have these requirements.
TABLE 14-5 Laws With Risk Assessment and Contingency Plan Requirements
RISK ASSESSMENT
REQUIRED?
NAME OF LAW
DR/BC PLAN REQUIRED?
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
Consumer financial information Yes Yes
Payment Card Industry
Standards*
Companies that accept credit
cards for payment Yes Yes
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act
Protected health information Yes Yes
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Corporate financial information Yes Implied if contingency plans are
indicated as an internal control
required to secure financial
reporting processes and systems
Federal Information Systems
Modernization Act
Federal information systems Yes Yes
*The Payment Card Industry (PCI) Standards are not a law. Organizations that wish to accept credit cards for
payment of goods and services must follow these standards. Banks that process credit card information enforce
PCI compliance.
When to Call the Police
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.Children learn the basics of “when to call 9-1-1” at a very early age. Children are
taught to call the police or emergency responders when:
Someone’s life is in immediate danger
When smoke or fire is present
When emergency medical help is needed
When a crime is being committed
These are good rules for an organization as well. Organizations should include rules
for when to call law enforcement or emergency responders in their contingency
plans.
Must People Report Crime?
Under common law, in general, a person has no duty to report a crime that he or she witnesses. For
purposes of the law, an organization is considered a “person.” Thus, most organizations also have no
obligation to report crimes they witness.
There are some instances where people are required by law to report crimes, however. For instance, in the
United States most people are required to report crimes where children or vulnerable adults are in danger.
These laws require people to report suspected abuse and neglect to law enforcement.
Some U.S. states have laws that require IT workers to report the discovery of child pornography on
computers. They must report the discovery to law enforcement. The IT worker must have discovered the
pornography within the scope of his or her employment. An IT worker is not required to search for this type of
material. However, if it is discovered, he or she must report it. At the time that this was written, at least 12
states had such laws. 7
Most organizations should report any criminal activity that involves their IT
resources or data. It is important to contact law enforcement right away to start
investigating the crime.
Sometimes it is hard to know if a crime is committed. If the organization
experiences a data breach, it is likely that a crime upon the organization was
committed. Possible crimes include trespass, theft of data, theft of resources,
unauthorized access, and similar crimes.
One of the most important reasons to promptly report crimes involving IT
resources is so that forensic evidence can be collected. This type of evidence can be
used to investigate computer crimes. However, this type of evidence is very volatile
and must be preserved properly.
One of the things that organizations must account for in their contingency plans is
the fact that communications systems will likely be overloaded in a regional disaster
or emergency. It may take time to contact first responders, as well as extra time to
receive their assistance. In regional natural disaster situations, people are usually
discouraged from calling emergency responders unless a person’s life is in
immediate danger. This is to keep emergency phone lines, such as 9-1-1 trunk
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.telephone lines, from being overloaded with calls.
Public Relations
An organization’s contingency plans must consider its public relations strategy.
Public relations (PR) is a marketing field that manages an organization’s public
image. It includes marketing the organization’s products and services, as well as
protecting the organization’s reputation and image. PR includes responding to crises
that threaten that image.
An organization’s PR team develops communication strategies. These strategies
are used to guide communications with employees, customers, and stakeholders.
Coordinating an organization’s public message is sometimes difficult under normal
business operations. It is even more difficult in an emergency. A PR strategy for
emergencies must consider:
Who is authorized to make comments on the organization’s behalf?
Who is authorized to approve the contents of comments shared with the public?
How often should information be shared with the public?
How should information be shared with the public?
How should information be shared if normal communications methods are
unavailable in an emergency?
It is important that an organization have a PR strategy for emergencies. The
organization must make sure that information is given to stakeholders in a reliable
and organized manner. It also must make sure that reliable information is
communicated to employees. An organization’s reputation can suffer if it does not
share enough information or shares it in a chaotic manner. Its reputation also can be
harmed if the organization distributes conflicting information from different sources.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter reviewed risk management and contingency planning concepts.
The RM process helps an organization understand the risks that it faces
each day. It also helps organizations strengthen their security posture in
response to threats and vulnerabilities. Many laws require organizations to
use RM concepts to create information security programs.
This chapter also reviewed different types of contingency plans. An
organization uses contingency plans to limit financial loss because of an
adverse event. Contingency plans help minimize the length of time that an
organization’s services and critical processes are interrupted after an
emergency.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Annual rate of occurrence (ARO)
Annualized loss expectancy (ALE)
Business continuity (BC) plans
Business impact analysis (BIA)
Checklist test
Cold site
Conflicts of interest
Disaster
Disaster recovery (DR) plans
Exposure factor
Full interruption test
Hot site
Incident
Incident response (IR)
Maximum tolerable downtime (MTD)
Mirrored site
Parallel test
Public relations (PR)
Qualitative risk analysis
Quantitative risk analysis
Realized risk
Residual risk
Risk assessment (RA)
Risk management (RM)
Simulation test
Single loss expectancy (SLE)
Walk-through test
Warm site
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.CHAPTER 14 ASSESSMENT
1. A parallel test uses current processing data to test IT system operation.
A. True
B. False
2. Which item is not part of the risk management process?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Risk analysis
Risk response
Continuous monitoring
Training employees
All of these are parts of the risk management process.
3. What does a risk assessment do?
4. Which type of contingency plan test is the least expensive?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Full interruption test
Parallel test
Simulation test
Checklist test
None of these is correct.
5. Which type of risk analysis uses real numbers to calculate risk?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Quantitative
Qualitative
Quasi-quantitative
Quasi-qualitative
None of these is correct.
6. The ________ is the percentage of asset loss that is likely to be caused by an
identified threat.
7. How is annualized loss expectancy calculated?
8. What is the main benefit of a qualitative risk assessment?
A. Measures the money cost of a risk
B. Scope of the assessment can be easily changed
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.C. Easy to administer
D. All of these are correct.
E. None of these is correct.
9. Which of the following is a qualitative risk assessment methodology?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
OCTAVE
ARO
MTD
BIA
None of these is correct.
10. Which risk response eliminates all risk of harm posted by a threat or
vulnerability?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Risk transfer
Risk mitigation
Risk acceptance
Risk avoidance
None of these is correct.
11. Which type of contingency plan reacts to attacks against an organization’s IT
infrastructure?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
BC plan
DR plan
IR plan
BC and DR plans
None of these is correct.
12. A(n) ________ is an event that adversely affects the confidentiality, integrity,
and/or availability of an organization’s data and IT systems.
13. A(n) ________ is a sudden, unplanned event that negatively affects the
organization’s critical business functions for an unknown period.
14. Which backup site is a fully operational backup site?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Mirrored site
Hot site
Warm site
Cold site
None of these is correct.
15. A business impact analysis identifies key business operations and resources.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.A. True
B. False
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.ENDNOTES
1. Verizon, “2019 Data Breach Investigation Report,” 2019. Available at
https://enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/dbir/ (accessed February 23,
2020).
2. National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Special Publication 800-39:
Managing Information Security Risk: Organization, Mission, and Information
System View,” March 2011. Available at
http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/Legacy/SP/nistspecialpublication800-39.pdf
(accessed February 23, 2020).
3. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), “Tornado Alley,”
undated. Available at https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/climate-information/extreme-
events/us-tornado-climatology/tornado-alley (accessed February 23, 2020).
4. U.S. Department of Justice, “Former Student Sentenced for Causing Damage to
University of Iowa Computer Network,” August 23, 2018. Available at
https://www.justice.gov/usao-sdia/pr/former-student-sentenced-causing-
damage-university-iowa-computer-network (accessed February 23, 2020).
5. National Institute of Standards and Technology, “Special Publication 800-61
(Rev. 2): Computer Security Incident Handling Guide,” August 2012. Available at
https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-61/rev-2/final (accessed February
23, 2020).
6. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.408 (2013).
7. Holt, Thomas J., Adam M. Bossler, and Kathryn C. Seigfried-Spellar,
Cybercrime and Digital Forensics: An Introduction. New York, NY: Routledge,
2017.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:00.
