© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
CHAPTER
4
Security and Privacy of Consumer
Financial Information
DENTITY THEFT IS a rapidly growing crime. Consumer financial information is a
gold mine for an identity thief, who can use this information to establish a new
identity. Identity theft victims spend time and money repairing damage caused by
identity thieves to restore their good name and their credit. Identity theft is a crime
that can have a large impact on a person’s financial situation.
I
Banks and other financial institutions use consumer financial information when
they conduct business with their customers. This information is valuable and must be
protected. The 2019 Verizon Data Breach Investigation Report stated 71 percent of
the data breaches that it analyzed were motivated by financial gain. The financial
industry is one of the top industries targeted. 1 This chapter focuses on the laws and
regulations that financial institutions must follow to protect the security and privacy of
consumer financial information.
Chapter 4 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.What the business challenges facing financial institutions are
What the different types of financial institutions are and who regulates
them
What consumer financial information is
What the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act is
What the Federal Trade Commission Red Flags Rule is
What the Payment Card Industry Standards are
What some case studies and examples are
Chapter 4 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the business challenges facing financial institutions
Define a financial institution and consumer financial information
Explain the main information security and privacy protections of the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
Describe the Federal Trade Commission Red Flags Rule
Describe the Payment Card Industry Standards
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Business Challenges Facing Financial
Institutions
Media reports about financial institutions experiencing a data breach are not
unusual:
In 2019, Capital One reported a data breach involving sensitive information from
over 100 million people. The hacker was a former employee at a cloud computing
company used by Capital One.
Equifax, a national credit reporting agency, reported a data breach in 2017.
Hackers stole Social Security numbers (SSNs) and other personal information of
143 million Americans.
In 2013, U.S. authorities arrested seven people who were part of a hacking
network that targeted financial institutions around the world. The thieves used the
data that they stole to withdraw over $45 million in cash from ATMs around the
world.
Heartland Payment Systems reported that hackers accessed its computer
systems in late 2008. This company processed 100 million payroll and credit card
payments per month for more than 250,000 businesses. The hackers might have
had access to the system for a couple of weeks. The company reported over $170
million in losses from the breach. 2
A Wyoming bank employee accidentally sent an electronic file to an incorrect
email address in 2009. The file contained the personal information of 1,300 bank
customers.
Financial institutions collect and use sensitive consumer financial information and
face many challenges in protecting this data. These challenges come from external
threats such as hackers, as well as from insiders, and include malicious and
nonmalicious actions. Scams that target financial institution customers include:
NOTE
Although definitions may vary slightly, a mega-breach is a data breach affecting more than 10 million
people.
Phishing scams designed to steal banking account credentials
Identity theft schemes that borrow money or pass counterfeit checks in the victim’s
name
Mortgage foreclosure scams designed to defraud customers of money
Investment scams with high-pressure sales tactics
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Tax scams from attackers demanding money for overdue taxes
Consumers demand that financial institutions protect their data and their money.
They also want financial institutions to protect them from financial harm if this data is
disclosed or stolen.
Consumers are not the only victims of identity theft. Financial institutions become
identity theft victims when thieves use a consumer’s financial information to do
business with the institution. Identity thieves can open bank accounts in the victim’s
name and write bad checks, create counterfeit checks to use on a victim’s account,
or take out loans in the victim’s name. Many bank rules and regulations force
financial institutions to bear the cost of many of these actions. A recent study
estimated that the global banking industry had over $18 million in cybercrime-related
costs in 2018. 3
The financial industry is highly regulated. These institutions must follow
regulations designed to protect the security and privacy of data that they collect and
use, which place a compliance burden on financial institutions.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.The Different Types of Financial Institutions
The National Bank Act of 1864 established the national banking system in the United
States. 4 The Act still governs U.S. national banks even though Congress has
updated it many times since 1864. Understanding the types of organizations that are
considered financial institutions is important to understanding how the national
banking system works. Most people know that financial institutions include banks
and credit unions. Other organizations that provide financial services to customers
include:
Savings and loan associations
Finance companies
Insurance companies
Investment companies
Several laws also define the types of organizations that are considered financial
institutions. For example, the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970 (FCRA) defines
financial institutions as banks, savings associations, and credit unions. 5 It also
includes any organization that holds a transaction account on behalf of a customer
as a financial institution. This law has a very specific definition.
Not all laws are that precise. The Bank Secrecy Act of 1970 has a long list of
organizations that are financial institutions for the purposes of that law. The list
includes banks, securities brokers, insurance companies, and pawnbrokers. 6
The Bank Secrecy Act of 1970 also is known as the Currency and Foreign
Transactions Reporting Act. 7 Congress created this law to fight drug trafficking,
money laundering, and other crimes. The Act keeps banks and other financial
institutions from being used by criminals to hide or transfer money and tries to keep
criminals from profiting from illegal acts. The definition of a financial institution is
broad for this reason.
The Gramm-Leach Bliley Act (GLBA) defines a financial institution as an
institution that conducts financial activities. 8 This law, which is discussed later in this
chapter, then points to the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956 for a list of actions
that are considered financial activities. These include lending, exchanging, or
investing money. They also include insurance and other financial advising services. 9
You must read laws carefully since different laws may define the same term in
different ways. It is always important to make sure that you understand how terms
are used in each law.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Consumer Financial Information
A consumer is a person who buys goods or services. Consumer information is the
personally identifiable information that a person provides to get a good or service. In
the financial industry, customers provide their information to get services from banks
or other financial institutions. People use it to get home or car loans, apply for credit
cards, or open checking accounts.
Items that a person buys for personal, family, or household use are called
consumer goods. Services that a person buys for personal, family, or household
use are called consumer services. These terms are not used to refer to goods or
services purchased by a business.
Consumer financial information includes many items other than a person’s name.
It can include:
SSNs
Driver’s license numbers
Address and telephone numbers (current and former)
Employment history (current and former)
Income information
Consumer financial information also can include a spouse’s employment and income
history. It is all information that a consumer provides to a financial institution to get a
product or service.
FYI
Many people access their banking accounts through online bank websites. A 2019 survey from the
American Bankers Association showed 70 percent of consumers use their mobile devices to manage their
bank accounts. 10 Some people also have multiple accounts at multiple banks. To protect your financial
information, use different strong passwords for each online account. Always enable multifactor
authentication if that option is available to you.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Who Regulates Financial Institutions?
Several different federal agencies regulate the different kinds of financial institutions.
This section focuses briefly on those agencies. These agencies enforce the
consumer protection laws discussed later in this chapter. State governments may
also regulate financial institutions. However, this chapter does not discuss that type
of regulation.
There are four federal regulatory agencies for U.S. financial institutions. These
agencies make sure that U.S. financial institutions are sound, which means they are
financially healthy and safe. These agencies also make sure that their institutions
follow federal law. The federal bank regulatory agencies are:
The Federal Reserve System
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
The National Credit Union Administration
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
TABLE 4-1 summarizes the agencies and the financial institutions that they regulate.
TABLE 4-1 Federal Banking Regulatory Agencies
AGENCY NAME
PRIMARY REGULATORY RESPONSIBILITY
Federal Reserve System (The Fed) State-chartered member banks
Bank holding companies
Foreign banks that operate in the United States
Foreign branches of U.S. member banks
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) Federally insured depository institutions
State-chartered banks that are not members of the
Fed
National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) Federally chartered credit unions
Federally insured credit unions
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) Nationally chartered banks
Federal savings associations
U.S. federal branches of foreign banks
The Federal Reserve System
Congress created the Federal Reserve System in 1913. The Federal Reserve Act of
1913 was passed to address financial uncertainty. 11 Bank and business failures were
having a tremendous impact on the U.S. economy. The Federal Reserve Act was
intended to provide the nation with a more stable economy.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.NOTE
The U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) fell by 4.8 percent during the first quarter of 2020. This was a
result of the 2020 COVID-19 nationwide public health emergency. 12
The Federal Reserve System is the central bank of the United States. 13
Essentially, it is a bank for other banks, as well as a bank for the federal government.
The Fed, an independent federal agency that reports directly to Congress, is
responsible for directing the nation’s monetary policy and maintaining the stability of
the U.S. financial system.
In addition to serving as the bank for the U.S. government, the Fed is the main
regulatory authority for:
NOTE
The Federal Reserve System is also known as “the Fed.”
State-chartered banks that choose to become members of the Federal Reserve
System
Bank holding companies. The Fed also supervises companies that control banks
(called bank holding companies)
Foreign banks that operate in the United States
Foreign branches of U.S. member banks.
State-chartered banks are not required to become Fed members. State-chartered
banks that are not Fed members are regulated by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation (FDIC). National banks are required to be members of the Federal
Reserve System, but they are not regulated by the Fed. The Fed supervises and
examines the financial institutions that it regulates to make sure that those
institutions are complying with the law. Because many different agencies regulate
banks, the Fed’s enforcement authority extends to state member banks of the Fed
and some foreign banks that operate in the United States.
The structure of the Fed includes a Board of Governors, located in Washington,
DC, and 12 regional Federal Reserve banks. The Board consists of seven members
who are nominated by the president and must be confirmed by the Senate. Each
member serves for a single 14-year term. The terms of each member are staggered
so that only one term expires at a time. The chair and vice-chair of the Board of
Governors are also nominated by the president and confirmed by the Senate. These
positions are filled by current members of the Board of Governors, who serve in
these positions for a 4-year term.
There are 12 regional Federal Reserve banks located throughout the United
States that serve different geographic districts. These Reserve Banks have 24
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.branches that carry out a variety of banking functions. The main customers of the
Reserve Banks are other banks; the Reserve Banks hold the cash reserves of other
institutions and distribute U.S. currency and coin within their region. They also
supervise and review member banks to make sure that they are sound. FIGURE 4-1
illustrates the structure of the Federal Reserve System.
FIGURE 4-1
The structure of the U.S. Federal Reserve System.
Description
NOTE
A depositor is a person who has deposited money into an account at a bank. Deposit accounts allow
money to be added and withdrawn by the account owner. A savings or checking account is a type of
deposit account, whereas an investment account is not a deposit account.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
The FDIC was formed in 1933 to provide deposit insurance to banks. Congress
formed the FDIC originally as a temporary government corporation under the
Banking Act of 1933. 14 The FDIC was formed in response to bank failures during the
Great Depression.
NOTE
From 1929 to 1933, bank failures resulted in about $1.3 billion in losses to depositors.
No depositor has lost any money on insured funds because of a bank failure
since FDIC insurance began on January 1, 1934. 15 Congress made the FDIC a
permanent federal agency in 1935 under the Banking Act of 1935.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.The FDIC insures deposits made in banks and savings associations. The FDIC
ensures deposit accounts only. It does not insure securities or mutual funds. When
the FDIC was formed in 1933, the original deposit insurance limit was $2,500. In
2020, the deposit insurance limit was 100 times that amount, or $250,000.
NOTE
To help protect the U.S. economy during the recession in 2008 to 2009, Congress raised the FDIC
insurance amount to $250,000 per depositor.
The FDIC insures deposit accounts in almost every bank in the United States for
protection in the event of a bank failure. If a bank fails, the FDIC returns the money
that a customer put in the bank, up to the deposit insurance limit. However, the FDIC
works to prevent bank failures by monitoring the economy. It also enforces
regulations that require banks to act in a sound manner. All national banks are
required by law to be insured by the FDIC.
The FDIC, the primary federal regulator for state-chartered banks that do not join
the Federal Reserve System, examines and supervises over 3,000 banks. The FDIC
reviews the banks that it regulates to make sure that those institutions are complying
with the law.
The FDIC has a five-member board of directors. Three of the directors are
appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate. These members each
serve 6-year terms. The other two members of the board are the government
officials who serve as the comptroller of the currency and the director of the
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). No more than three of the members
of the FDIC board may be from the same political party. The chair and vice-chair of
the board of directors are also nominated by the president and confirmed by the
Senate. These positions are filled by current members of the board and have 5-year
terms. The FDIC has eight regional offices.
National Credit Union Administration
Congress enacted the Federal Credit Union Act in 1934. 16 That law allowed federally
chartered credit unions to form. The National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) is
an independent federal agency formed in 1970. 17 Its role is to charter and supervise
federal credit unions.
A credit union is a cooperative financial organization that can have federal, state,
or corporate affiliations. Members of a credit union share the same affiliation. They
might live in the same city or work for the same employer. A credit union is a
nonprofit institution that is run by its members, who pool their money together at a
credit union to save and make loans to one another.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.NOTE
Federal credit unions often use the word federal in their name. They may also use the initials F.C.U., or
“federal credit union.”
The NCUA operates the National Credit Union Share Insurance Fund (NCUSIF),
created by Congress in 1970. All federal credit unions must be insured by the
NCUSIF. This fund also insures deposits in state-chartered credit unions that qualify
for the fund. The NCUSIF operates similar to the deposit insurance provided by the
FDIC. It protects almost 95 million federal credit union account holders. It also
insures a majority of state-chartered credit unions.
NOTE
No credit union member has lost any money on deposit accounts because of the failure of credit unions
insured by the NCUSIF.
The NCUA supervises all federal credit unions and NCUSIF-insured state credit
unions. It also issues guidance and enforces the provisions of the Federal Credit
Union Act. The NCUA is the regulatory enforcement authority for federal credit
unions, and it shares enforcement authority for some laws with other federal
agencies. The NCUA enforces the GLBA consumer privacy provisions for federal
credit unions. The FTC enforces those provisions for federally insured, state-
chartered credit unions.
The NCUA has a three-member board of directors. The president nominates
board members, who then must be confirmed by the Senate. Board members serve
6-year terms. Their terms are staggered so that only one term expires at a time. No
more than two board members can be from the same political party. The NCUA has
five regional offices across the United States that charter and supervise federal
credit unions in their regions.
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) was originally established in
1863. 18 The National Bank Act of 1864 is the law that authorizes the OCC today. The
OCC, which is a part of the U.S. Department of the Treasury, charters and
supervises national banks and federal savings associations. Federal savings
associations, also called thrifts, are organizations that accept savings account
deposits and then invest the proceeds of those deposits in home mortgages.
National banks and federal savings associations are members of the Federal
Reserve System and are required to be insured by the FDIC.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.NOTE
In July 2011, the Office of Thrift Supervision became part of the OCC. Before becoming part of the OCC,
the Office of Thrift Supervision was the entity responsible for regulating federal savings associations.
The OCC is led by a comptroller who is appointed by the president, confirmed by
the Senate, and serves a 5-year term. The comptroller also serves as a member of
the board of directors of the FDIC. The OCC supervises and regulates about 1,400
national banks and federal savings associations. It has the authority to enforce laws
and regulations against national banks and federal savings associations.
NOTE
National banks often use the word national or the phrase national association in their name. They also
may use the initials “N.A.”
FYI
Federal savings banks and savings and loan associations often use the words federal, federal association,
federal savings bank, or federal savings and loan association in their name. They also may include initials
for those terms, such as “F.A.,” “F.S.B.,” or “F.S.L.A.”
Special Role of the Federal Financial Institutions
Examination Council
Congress established the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC)
in 1979. It was created by the Financial Institutions Regulatory and Interest Rate
Control Act of 1978 (FIRA). 19 The FFIEC promotes uniform practices among the
federal financial institutions and their regulators. Its purpose is to:
Establish principles and standards for the examination of federal financial
institutions.
Develop a uniform reporting system for federal financial institutions.
Conduct training for federal bank examiners.
Make recommendations regarding bank supervision matters.
Encourage the adoption of uniform principles and standards by federal and state
banks. 20
The council has six members. They are:
The chair of the FDIC
The chair of the NCUA
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.The comptroller from the OCC
The director of the CFPB
A member of the Board of Governors of the Fed
The chair of the FFIEC State Liaison Committee
The chair of the FFIEC serves for 2 years. The chair position rotates among
members of the council. The member agencies fund the FFIEC.
NOTE
An examination is the periodic evaluation of a bank, which includes a review of the health of the bank and
its compliance with banking regulations. An examination might include a review of management and
operations, as well as the bank’s policies. A bank examiner is the person who conducts this review.
The FFIEC has six task forces. Representatives from each agency serve on each
task force, which includes at least one senior official from each of the member
agencies: 21
Consumer compliance—This task force promotes a uniform approach to
consumer protection laws and regulations. It develops proposed policies and
procedures for the agencies to use in their regulatory activities.
Examiner education—This task force oversees the FFIEC’s intra-agency
examiner education programs. The task force also develops specific programs in
response to requests from the FFIEC or its members.
Information sharing—This task force promotes sharing electronic information
among FFIEC members to help them meet their regulatory responsibilities.
Reports—This task force establishes uniform financial reports for FFIEC
members.
Supervision—This task force establishes supervision and examination
procedures for FFIEC members. Its purpose is to help reduce regulatory burden
by promoting effective supervision and examination practices.
Surveillance systems—This task force develops systems to monitor the financial
condition and performance of financial institutions.
The FFIEC is required to submit an annual report to Congress on its activities. The
FFIEC does not regulate financial institutions because it has no authority to do so.
The federal agencies carry out their own enforcement actions against banks in their
jurisdiction.
Special Roles of the Consumer Financial Protection
Bureau and the Federal Trade Commission
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.The CFPB and the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) are two entities that have
consumer protection functions.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
The CFPB was created in 2010, 22 and its purpose was to protect consumers in the
financial industry. Unlike the Fed, FDIC, NCUA, and OCC, which regulate financial
institutions directly, the CFPB focuses solely on consumers. The CFPB is an
independent agency that ensures that all consumers have access to financial
products and services. It also ensures that financial products and services are
offered in ways that are fair and competitive. The CFPB has the authority to examine
financial institutions to ensure that the institutions are complying with federal
consumer financial laws.
The CFPB is led by a director who is nominated by the president and confirmed
by the Senate. The CFPB has six primary divisions and several advisory
committees, including:
Consumer advisory board
Community bank advisory council
Credit union advisory council
Academic research council
Federal Trade Commission
The FTC is an independent federal agency created by Congress in 1914 under the
Federal Trade Commission Act. 23 Similar to the CFPB, the FTC is an important
regulatory authority for consumer protection issues. The mission of the FTC is to
protect consumers and make sure that business is competitive. It tries to eliminate
practices that are harmful to business. The FTC has responsibilities under 46
different federal laws. Most of these laws include consumer protection elements.
Under the Federal Trade Commission Act, the FTC can investigate “the
organization, business, conduct, practices, and management of any person,
partnership, or corporation engaged in or whose business affects commerce.” 24 It
also can stop unfair and deceptive acts or trade practices. 25 Most of the FTC’s
authority comes from this law. The FTC makes and enforces rules for some parts of
the financial industry. However, the FTC cannot regulate banks, thrifts, or federal
credit unions—the other federal banking regulatory agencies already regulate them.
The FTC does enforce laws at nonbanking institutions such as consumer finance
companies, debt counseling companies, and credit bureaus.
The FTC is led by five commissioners. Each commissioner serves a 7-year term.
They are nominated by the president and confirmed by the Senate. The president
also chooses one commissioner to act as the chair. To maintain the independence of
the FTC, no more than three commissioners can belong to the same political party. 26
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.The FTC has seven regional offices across the United States.
NOTE
Unfair trade practices are business practices that a consumer cannot avoid and that cause injury.
Deceptive trade practices are any business practices that include false or misleading claims.
In 2012 the CFPB and the FTC signed an agreement to coordinate their efforts to
protect consumers. 27 The agreement also helped to avoid duplication of effort
between the two agencies. As part of the agreement, the agencies agreed to meet
regularly and to coordinate their rulemaking efforts. They also agreed to share
consumer complaints. Both agencies work closely with federal banking regulatory
agencies when enacting rules to protect consumer financial information.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
Congress passed the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), also known as the Financial
Services Modernization Act of 1999, in 1999. 28 It is the primary law governing the
protection of consumer financial information. The law made great changes in the
banking industry, allowing banks, securities, and insurance companies to merge,
which was not allowed before the law. The financial industry urged Congress to pass
the law so that customers could use one company for all their financial needs.
GLBA allowed large companies to merge. In doing so, these new, larger
corporations would have access to sizable amounts of consumer financial
information. Therefore, people feared that their privacy would suffer. This fear was
not unreasonable, because financial institutions often sold customer banking
information to other companies. To help alleviate this fear, Congress included privacy
protections in the GLBA.
Purpose, Scope, and Main Requirements
GLBA applies to financial institutions. It defines a financial institution as any
institution that engages in financial activities. The definition of financial activities is
very broad. It includes borrowing, lending, providing credit counseling, debt
collection, and other activities. 29
The law requires financial institutions to protect a customer’s nonpublic financial
information. It states that “each financial institution has an affirmative and continuing
obligation to respect the privacy of its customers.” 30 This means institutions must
provide privacy and security protections to its customers and the customers’
nonpublic personal information (NPI).
Nonpublic personal information is personally identifiable financial information that
a consumer gives to a financial institution. 31 NPI also includes private information
that an institution gets from other sources. It also includes lists or descriptions of
consumers that are prepared by using this kind of information. NPI can be in paper
or electronic form and includes:
SSN
Financial account numbers
Credit card numbers
Date of birth
Name, address, and phone numbers when collected with financial data
Details of any transactions or the fact that an individual is a customer of a financial
institution
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.NPI does not include publicly available information about a consumer. Publicly
available personal information is available to the general public. It can be made
public through state or federal records or disclosures that are required by law.
Information can be made public in different ways, such as records filed in a county
recorder’s office. Financial institutions cannot assume that certain types of
personally identifiable information are publicly available. They must take reasonable
steps to make sure that information is actually publicly available if they want to claim
that it is publicly available.
NOTE
A person’s address in a phone book is publicly available.
GLBA requires financial institutions to follow three main rules to protect consumer
financial information:
Privacy Rule
Safeguards Rule
Pretexting Rule
GLBA applies to consumer financial transactions. These are transactions made for
personal, family, or household services. GLBA does not apply to business
transactions.
The Privacy Rule
Under the GLBA Privacy Rule, 32 a financial institution may not share NPI with non-
affiliated third parties unless the institution gives notice to the consumer. The notice
must tell consumers about the types of data that the institution collects and how it
uses that information. This is called a notice of privacy practices. GLBA also requires
that consumers have a chance to opt-out of some data sharing. The GLBA Privacy
Rule went into effect on July 1, 2001.
FYI
Congress originally gave the federal bank regulatory agencies, the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC), and the FTC the authority to create rules to enforce the GLBA privacy provisions. All of the
agencies created and issued similar regulations that are tailored for their respective oversight areas. In
2010, the Dodd-Frank Act 33 transferred the rulemaking authority to the CFPB. The CFPB then restated the
implementing regulations in a document known as Regulation P. 34
GLBA distinguishes between customers and consumers for its notice
requirements: 35
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.A customer is a consumer who has a continuing relationship with a financial
institution. An institution must give a customer written notice of its privacy
practices as soon as the customer relationship begins.
A consumer is any individual who obtains a consumer financial product or service
from a financial institution. A financial institution does not have to give consumers
notice of its privacy practices if it does not share its consumers’ NPI with
nonaffiliated parties.
A person is a customer of a financial institution if he or she has an ongoing
relationship with the institution. For example, a person with a checking or savings
account at a bank has an ongoing relationship with that bank. An example of a
consumer without a customer relationship is a person who withdraws cash from an
ATM machine that does not belong to his or her personal bank.
GLBA requires that certain information be included in the privacy notice. 36 For
example, the financial institution must describe the types of NPI that it collects. It
must disclose how it shares NPI with affiliated and nonaffiliated third parties. Finally,
it must state how it protects a customer’s NPI. Customers must receive a copy of the
privacy notice annually for as long as the customer relationship continues.
NOTE
A nonaffiliated party is an entity that is not legally related to a financial institution. Affiliated parties, in
contrast, have a legal relationship of some kind. An affiliated party is an entity that controls, is controlled
by, or is under the common control of another entity. Affiliates are businesses that are within the same
corporate family.
The privacy notice also must provide a customer with an opportunity to stop a
financial institution from sharing the customer’s NPI with nonaffiliated third parties. 37
This is called an “opt-out” provision. The privacy notice must tell customers how to
opt-out. If a customer does not opt-out, then the financial institution can share NPI in
the ways described by its privacy notice.
GLBA does not give customers the right to opt-out of situations where a financial
institution shares NPI with its affiliates. There are also some instances where
customers cannot opt-out at all. For example, customers cannot opt-out of a
disclosure that is required by law.
NOTE
The FCRA also allows customers to opt-out of some types of information sharing. Under that law,
customers can stop financial institutions from sharing their credit report or credit applications with affiliates.
GLBA privacy notices must include this disclosure.
GLBA did not specify how a financial institution should write its notice of privacy
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.practices. Many of the first-created notices were hard to read because they
contained legal and complex language. That made it difficult for people to
understand their rights. It was also very hard to compare the privacy policies of
different financial institutions.
After customers complained about the hard-to-read notices, Congress responded
quickly. The Financial Services Regulatory Relief Act of 2006 amended the GLBA
Privacy Rule so that it required the agencies responsible for enforcing the Privacy
Rule to propose a model form for privacy notices. Congress directed that this model
form should be easy to read and understand.
NOTE
In 2001, the Privacy Rights Clearinghouse studied the privacy notices of 60 financial institutions. The study
found that most notices were written at a third- or fourth-year college reading level. 38
On November 17, 2009, the federal bank regulatory agencies, the SEC, and the
FTC announced that they had completed the model form. 39 All of the agencies
amended their privacy regulations to include use of it. The agencies made an online
form builder available in April 2010. The Model Privacy Notice Form is shown in
FIGURE 4-2.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.FIGURE 4-2A
The Model Privacy Notice Form.
Federal Trade Commission (see https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/attachments/press-releases/federal-
regulators-issue-final-model-privacy-notice-form/privacymodelform.pdf).
Description
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.
FIGURE 4-2BThe Model Privacy Notice Form, page 2.
Federal Trade Commission, https://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/attachments/press-releases/federal-regulators-
issue-final-model-privacy-notice-form/privacymodelform.pdf
Description
The Safeguards Rule
GLBA requires the federal bank regulatory agencies, the SEC, and the FTC to issue
security standards for the institutions that they regulate. 40 This is commonly referred
to as the Safeguards Rule. The law requires that each agency establish standards
that:
Protect the security and confidentiality of customer information.
Protect against threats to the security or integrity of customer information.
Protect against unauthorized access to or use of customer information that could
result in harm to a customer.
Congress did not require the regulatory agencies to work together to create these
standards, as it did for the Privacy Rule. 41 Therefore, the SEC issued its standards in
June 2000. The federal bank regulatory agencies worked through the FFIEC to
create joint guidelines that were issued in 2001. The FTC issued its Safeguards Rule
in May 2002. Financial institutions regulated by the FTC had to comply with its rule
by May 2003. This section will refer to the FTC Safeguards Rule.
The FTC Safeguards Rule 42 requires financial institutions to create a written
information security program that must state how the institution collects and uses
customer information. It must also describe the administrative, technical, or physical
controls used to protect that information. The program must protect information in
paper and electronic form.
The FTC rule requires that a financial institution’s information security program
be a good fit for its size and complexity. The program also must be suitable for the
sensitivity of the customer information that the institution uses. As part of its
program, an institution must:
Assign an employee to coordinate the program.
Conduct a risk assessment to identify risks to the security, confidentiality, and
integrity of customer information and assess current safeguards to make sure that
they are effective.
Design and implement safeguards to control the identified risks.
Select service providers and make sure that any contract includes terms to protect
customer information.
Review the information security program on an ongoing basis to account for
changes in the business.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.The Safeguards Rule allows financial institutions to pick the controls that best protect
their customer information. It specifies three areas that institutions must review:
Employee management and training
Information systems design
Detecting and responding to attacks and system failures
Institutions must be sure to address these areas when conducting their risk
assessments. They also must make sure that these areas are included in their
information security program.
A financial institution also must make sure that its service providers protect
customer information. A service provider is an entity that provides services to a
financial institution. A business that handles outsourced tasks is a service provider.
These providers may access customer information when they provide services to an
institution. Institutions must require their affiliates and service providers to protect
customer information.
FYI
The FTC announced in March 2019 that it was seeking comments on proposed changes to the
Safeguards Rule, which were due in August 2019. As of this writing, the FTC has not made any updates to
the Safeguards Rule. You can track the progress of any updates to the rule at
https://www.regulations.gov/docket?D=FTC-2019-0019.
The Pretexting Rule
GLBA’s final consumer protection is the Pretexting Rule. 43 Pretexting, also known as
social engineering, is trying to gain access to customer information without proper
authority to do so.
Under the law, it is illegal to make false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements to a
financial institution or its customers to get customer information. It is also illegal to
use forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents to do the same thing. These rules
try to stop identity theft before a crime is committed. Courts can impose criminal
penalties if these rules are violated.
Most financial institutions address pretexting in their information security
programs. It is covered as part of security awareness and training activities.
Employees are trained to recognize and report pretexting.
Oversight
GLBA compliance oversight falls to different federal agencies. Oversight is based on
the type of financial institution under review. The federal bank regulatory agencies
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.(the Fed, FDIC, OCC, and NCUA) enforce GLBA for the institutions that they
regulate. For example, the SEC oversees GLBA for securities brokers and dealers.
Each agency can bring an action against the institutions that they regulate for not
complying with GLBA.
The FTC enforces GLBA for any financial institution that is not regulated by one
of the other agencies. Similar to the other agencies, the FTC may bring an action
against any financial institution that does not comply with GLBA. The FTC has been
quite active in pursuing GLBA enforcement actions.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Federal Trade Commission Red Flags Rule
Congress passed the Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003 (FACTA) in
response to the growth in identity theft crimes. 44 FACTA made it harder for consumer
financial information to be used to commit these crimes through changes to the
FCRA.
Congress recognized that the financial industry has a role in protecting
customers from identity theft. Therefore, FACTA required the federal bank regulatory
agencies and the FTC to work together to create rules that would identify and
respond to possible instances of identity theft. These agencies issued a joint rule,
known as the Identity Theft Red Flags Rule, 45 on November 9, 2007.
Purpose
The purpose of the Red Flags Rule is to fight identity theft. The rule requires covered
financial institutions to be on the lookout for certain warning signs that might indicate
identity theft is taking place in consumer financial transactions.
NOTE
A Red Flag is any “pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity
theft.” 47
The Red Flags Rule is not a data security rule. It does not require institutions to
protect data in a certain way. Instead, it requires them to be flexible and responsive
to different business situations where identity theft could be possible. 46
Scope
The Red Flags Rule applies to financial institutions and creditors that have covered
accounts. Financial institutions are state and federal banks, credit unions, and
savings and loan associations that are regulated by the Fed, FDIC, OCC, and
NCUA.
Under the Red Flags Rule, a creditor is any person or organization that regularly
extends, renews, or continues customer credit; and who also:
Receives or uses consumer reports in connection with a credit transaction
Gives information to consumer reporting agencies in connection with a credit
transaction
Loans a person money 48
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.The definition of covered account is also broad. There are two types of covered
accounts. The first type is an account that is used “primarily for personal, family, or
household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or
transactions.” 49 Examples of this type of account include:
Credit card accounts
Car loan accounts
Utility accounts
Cell phone carrier accounts
The second type of covered account is an account for which identity theft is a
reasonably foreseeable risk because of the use of the account. The risk includes
harm to a customer. It also could be harmful to the soundness of the financial
institution or creditor. These types of accounts are considered covered accounts if
the potential for identity theft is “reasonably foreseeable.”
NOTE
Payment in arrears refers to payments that are made after a business provides goods or services. Many
businesses bill in arrears. They include utility companies, medical providers, and cell phone service
providers.
Organizations fall within the scope of the Red Flags Rule because of their
actions. They may not rely on just the definitions of “financial institution,” “creditor,” or
“covered account” to determine if they must comply with the Rule. Organizations
must comply with the Red Flags Rule if they act similar to financial institutions or
creditors and use accounts that resemble covered accounts.
FYI
The Red Flag Program Clarification Act of 2010 tightened the definition of creditor and exempted service
providers such as doctors and healthcare professionals, lawyers, and accountants from the application of
the Red Flags Rule. 50 Associations that represented these professions filed numerous lawsuits to stop the
FTC from enforcing the Red Flags Rule against these professions. They claimed that Congress did not
intend that service providers who were paid in arrears be considered creditors under the Red Flags Rule.
Congress agreed with those arguments when it passed the Red Flags Clarification Act.
Main Requirements
Under the Red Flags Rule, covered entities must develop a written Identity Theft
Prevention Program. This program must detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft in
covered accounts. The written program must address both new and existing covered
accounts.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Organizations can take the size and complexity of their operations into account
when preparing their program. Larger companies that handle more accounts may
need a more detailed plan, whereas smaller companies with fewer accounts may not
need a very detailed plan. The written program must be appropriate for the
organization.
An organization’s board of directors must approve the program. If an organization
does not have a board of directors, then a senior official must approve the program.
The Rule requires organizations to train their employees about their written
programs. Organizations also must review their relationships with third-party service
providers. Organizations must make sure that those activities do not raise any Red
Flags.
A written program must have the following components:
Identify Red Flags that apply to the organization.
Determine how the Red Flags will be detected during business processes.
Determine how to respond to Red Flags that are detected.
Review the written program periodically.
The agencies that worked together to create the Red Flags Rule realized that it may
be difficult for organizations to determine activities that might raise a Red Flag. They
created five different Red Flag categories:
1. Alerts or notifications received from consumer reporting agencies or service
providers
2. Suspicious documents
3. Suspicious personal identifying information
4. Unusual or suspicious activity of a covered account
5. Notice from customers, law enforcement authorities, or other persons regarding
possible identity theft in connection with covered accounts
The agencies also provided 26 examples of activity that might be considered a Red
Flag. 51 The categories of Red Flags and some of the examples that fall in each
category are provided in TABLE 4-2.
TABLE 4-2 Red Flag Categories and Examples
RED FLAG CATEGORY
Alerts, Notifications, and
Warnings From a Credit
Reporting Company
RED FLAG EXAMPLES
A fraud alert placed on a consumer report
A credit freeze placed on a consumer report
A consumer report indicating a pattern of activity that does not match the
customer’s historical activity
Identification documents that look altered or forged
A signature on a document does not match the signature in the customer’s
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Suspicious Documents
file
A photograph on an identification document that does not resemble the
person presenting the identification document
Suspicious Personal
Identifying Information Personal information provided that does not match external information
sources, for example, an address that does not match the customer’s
consumer report
Incomplete personal information provided when opening an account
Personal information provided that does not match the information in the
customer’s file
Unusual or Suspicious Activity
on a Covered Account A covered account used in a manner that does not match the customer’s
historical activity
An unpaid account with no history of nonpayment on that account
Frequent new use of a covered account that was unused for a long period
Notice From Customers or
Others About Identity Theft Customer notification to the covered organization about suspected identity
theft
Law enforcement notification to the financial institution or creditor about
fraudulent activity
Once an organization identifies an action that might raise a Red Flag, it must take
steps to detect that activity in its normal business practices. For example, an
organization decides that forged or altered documents are a potential Red Flag. It
must then detect when documents are forged or altered. Other ways to detect Red
Flags could include asking customers to provide additional identification.
The proper response to a Red Flag depends on the situation. An organization
could contact the customer or monitor accounts as a potential response. An
organization also can investigate a potential Red Flag and determine that a
response is not needed, depending upon the circumstances.
Oversight
Each agency that worked together to create the Red Flags Rule enforces it within
their authority. The Federal Reserve System, FDIC, OCC, and NCUA regulate most
financial institutions. Because financial institutions are highly regulated, it makes
sense for Red Flags Rule enforcement to stem from one of these regulatory
agencies. Note that in 2010, the Dodd-Frank Act transferred rulemaking and
enforcement of the Red Flags Rule to the SEC for the institutions that it regulates.
The FTC enforces the rule for all other organizations.
Federal civil fines are possible for violations of the Red Flags Rule. Only the
government can impose sanctions for violating the Red Flags Rule. The Red Flags
Rule does not permit a private right of action. This means that individuals cannot sue
financial institutions or creditors if they violate the Red Flags Rule.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Payment Card Industry Standards
Americans have over 375 million open credit card accounts. 52 Credit cards
essentially allow you to borrow money to buy things. You borrow the money from the
bank that issues the credit card in exchange for a promise to pay the loan back
within a certain period. If you fail to pay the loan by the due date, you are charged
interest on the loan. Your credit card number is sensitive consumer financial
information. If your credit card information is stolen, unauthorized users could
impersonate you and make large purchases in your name. Credit card companies
work hard to ensure that your credit card information is kept secure during
transactions. They accomplish this work through the Payment Card Industry Security
Standards Council (PCI Council).
The PCI Council is made up of representatives of the major credit card
companies. 53 The major credit card companies, also called credit card brands, are:
MasterCard
Visa
American Express
JCB International
Discover
The PCI Council is not a government agency; rather, it is a private industry
organization. The PCI Council, formed in 2006, creates safeguards designed to
protect credit card data. Any merchant or service provider who accepts credit cards
must follow the safeguards. This list of security measures is called the Payment
Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard (DSS). The most recent version of the
DSS, version 3.2.1, was released in May 2018. 54 A new version of PCI DSS is
expected to be released in late 2020. This chapter addresses version 3.2.1 of the
standard.
Purpose
Before the PCI Council was formed, each credit card company made up its own
security requirements that applied to the credit cards that it issued. Merchants who
accepted credit cards for payment had to follow these standards. Most merchants
wanted to accept more than one type of credit card, and it was hard for them to
follow so many different standards. The first DSS combined the standards of the
founding credit card companies into one standard.
NOTE
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Cardholder data is the data available from a credit card. It includes cardholder name, expiration date,
account number, and verification numbers. The data is printed on the card and can be contained in the
magnetic stripe on the back of the card.
The DSS offers a single approach to safeguarding sensitive cardholder data for
all credit card issuers. It identifies 12 basic categories of security requirements that
must be followed to protect credit card data.
Scope
All merchants who accept credit cards must comply with the PCI DSS. PCI has
different compliance requirements for different merchants that are based upon the
size of the merchant’s credit card operations. There are four basic merchant levels:
Level 1 – Over 6 million transactions annually
Level 2 – Between 1 and 6 million transactions annually
Level 3 – Between 20,000 and 1 million transactions annually
Level 4 – Less than 20,000 transactions annually
These basic levels are subject to adjustment because each of the credit card brands
sets its merchant levels individually. For example, Visa merchant Level 1 includes
merchants that process over 6 million Visa transactions per year. 55 MasterCard Level
1 includes any merchant that processes 6 million MasterCard transactions per year
or meets Visa’s Level 1 criteria. 56 MasterCard Level 1 also includes merchants that:
Have suffered a data breach that compromised account data, or
Any merchant that MasterCard feels should be a Level 1 merchant to minimize
risk
Any merchant that accepts credit cards must comply with the DSS. This means that
they must implement and follow the DSS rules. The credit card brands enforce DSS
compliance. Most of the credit card brands also require merchants to validate their
compliance with the rules. This means that it is not enough for the merchant to say
that it is compliant with the rules; instead, the merchant must prove that it is
compliant with the rules.
Different merchant levels have different validation requirements set by the credit
card brands. Visa requires its Level 1 merchants to have an independent evaluation
each year. 57 They also must have a quarterly network scan by an approved vendor.
A Level 3 merchant, which is a smaller merchant than a Level 1 merchant, has
different requirements. Under the Visa validation requirements, a Level 3 merchant
must only complete an annual self-assessment form and have a quarterly network
scan.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.NOTE
A merchant is a businessperson who sells goods or services to earn a profit. A merchant can be a large,
well-known store or small corner grocery store. For the PCI DSS, a merchant is any entity that accepts
credit cards for payment.
Main Requirements
The DSS applies only to the systems that process, store, or transmit credit card
data. 58 The DSS has specific requirements that each merchant must follow to protect
cardholder data. These are the minimum set of requirements for protecting
cardholder data. The DSS requirements use preventative, detective, and corrective
controls to secure credit card data. The DSS has six high-level categories and 12
major rules. The main categories of controls and rules are listed in TABLE 4-3.
TABLE 4-3 PCI DSS v.3.2.1 Categories of Controls and Rules
DSS CONTROL CATEGORY
MAIN RULES
Build and Maintain a Secure Network and Systems Merchants must install and maintain firewall and
router configurations to protect cardholder data.
Merchants may not use vendor-supplied defaults for
passwords and other security measures.
Protect Cardholder Data Merchants must take action to protect stored
cardholder data.
Merchants must encrypt cardholder data while it is
transmitted across public networks.
Maintain a Vulnerability Management Program Merchants must use antivirus software that is
updated regularly.
Merchants must develop and use secure systems
and applications.
Implement Strong Access Control Measures Merchants must use need-to-know principles to
restrict access to credit card data.
Merchants must control access to system
components.
Merchants must restrict physical access to
cardholder data.
Regularly Monitor and Test Networks Merchants must monitor access to network
resources and cardholder data.
Merchants must test their security systems and
processes regularly.
Maintain an Information Security Policy Merchants must create an information security policy.
NOTE
The complete list of PCI DSS requirements is available at https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Each DSS rule has several subrequirements that explain how the rule should be
met. Merchants must understand how their information systems work to implement
the DSS requirements and subrequirements. Merchants also must understand their
business processes and be aware of how credit card data is used within their
systems. They must consider data security as part of their everyday business
operations.
Oversight
The PCI Security Standards Council does not manage compliance programs. It also
does not levy penalties for noncompliance. The Council only creates the DSS and
provides merchants with resources to comply with those standards. Each of the
individual credit card companies enforces the DSS for its own cards and the
merchants who use those cards. Most credit card companies use the threat of
financial penalties to compel DSS compliance. Compliance is contractually based. It
is required through contracts between credit card companies, banks that issue the
cards, banks that process credit card transactions, and the merchant.
Penalties for DSS noncompliance tend to be tied to events that expose
cardholder data. For example, Visa requires its merchants to notify it immediately if
they experience a breach involving credit card data. 59 Visa may impose a penalty of
up to $100,000 per event if it is not notified immediately. Fines can be increased if it
is determined that a merchant was not DSS compliant at the time of the breach.
Similarly, fines may be reduced if the merchant can show that it was compliant with
the DSS at the time of the breach.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.Case Studies and Examples
The following case studies show how the laws discussed in this chapter are used.
These case studies are real-world examples of how regulatory agencies apply laws
and rules to protect consumer information.
FTC Privacy and Safeguards Rule Enforcement
The FTC enforces the GLBA Privacy and Safeguards Rule against some types of
financial institutions. The FTC can begin an investigation on its own or in response to
a consumer complaint.
In July 2019, the FTC filed a complaint against Equifax, Inc., a credit-reporting
agency. Equifax reported a data breach in 2017 in which hackers stole SSNs and
other personal information on 143 million Americans. In its complaint, the FTC
alleged that Equifax failed to secure customer personal information stored on its
network. This is a violation of the GLBA Safeguards Rule.
The FTC argued that Equifax had a series of basic security failures that led to the
breach. These failures happened over several months and included:
Failure to patch critical vulnerabilities in Equifax information systems
Failure to maintain a technology asset inventory, which meant that Equifax did not
properly scan all its assets for vulnerabilities
Failure to segment its computer network
Failure to encrypt highly confidential information, such as SSNs, stored on its
information systems
Failure to detect intrusions into legacy information systems
Failure to update expired security certificates on its information systems
The CFPB and 50 U.S. states and territories also filed complaints against Equifax.
Their complaints alleged violations of different laws. Only the FTC had jurisdiction
over Equifax for violations of the GLBA Safeguards Rule. The FTC, CFPB, and the
states all worked together to solve their complaints against Equifax.
NOTE
The FTC documents related to the Equifax breach are available at https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-
proceedings/172-3203/equifax-inc.
In late July 2020, Equifax agreed to pay at least $575 million to settle all claims
with the CFPB, FTC, and the states. That settlement agreement amount could be
increased by $125 million if the original settlement amount fails to compensate
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.consumers for their losses related to the breach.
With respect to the GLBA Safeguards Rule, Equifax also agreed to:
Comply with the GLBA Safeguards Rule and establish a comprehensive
information security program that contains the requirements specified in the order.
Provide yearly reports on the status of its information security program to its board
of directors.
Obtain an independent assessment of its information security program every 2
years. The assessor selected must be approved by the FTC in advance.
Report yearly to the FTC that it is following the FTC’s settlement agreement.
Notify the FTC within 10 days if it experiences an information security incident.
NOTE
Consumers can learn more about their rights related to the Equifax settlement at www.ftc.gov/equifax.
The FTC’s settlement agreement with Equifax ends in July 2039. Equifax must follow
the terms in the settlement agreement until the agreement expires.
Credit Card Security Example
Target is a popular department store in the United States and Canada. On
December 19, 2013, Target reported that the credit and debit card data of over 40
million customers was compromised in a security breach. 60 It reported that the
compromise took place throughout the United States during the busy Thanksgiving-
to-Christmas shopping season. Credit cardholders who shopped in Target stores
from November 27 to December 15, 2013, were affected by the breach.
Target reported that it found malware on its cash registers on December 15.
Company officials said that they immediately deleted the malware. They then began
to notify their customers about the incident. On December 27, 2013, Target reported
that encrypted personal identification number, or PIN, information was also
compromised in the breach. PINs are passwords used in debit card transactions.
On January 17, 2014, Target reported that the attack it suffered during the height
of the holiday shopping season may have affected an additional 70 million
customers. 61 Their personal information—names, addresses, and phone numbers—
was stolen. The massive data breach was further reported to have extended beyond
the 2013 holiday shopping season to people who had not shopped at Target for
years.
Target’s costs associated with the breach were extensive. Visa, Mastercard,
American Express, and Discover all made claims against Target for the data breach.
Target paid $86 million to Visa and Mastercard to settle claims associated with the
breach. In its 2016 annual report, Target reported that it had experienced $292
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.million in expenses related to the breach.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.CHAPTER SUMMARY
Consumer financial information is valuable. In the wrong hands, it can be
used to commit identity theft. The U.S. federal government regulates how
this information can be used. The financial industry also takes steps to guard
this information. These laws and standards work together to protect
consumers from identity theft.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Consumer goods
Consumer services
Deceptive trade practices
Nonpublic personal information (NPI)
Pretexting
Red Flag
Unfair trade practices
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.CHAPTER 4 ASSESSMENT
1. What are consumer goods?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Items purchased for personal use
Items purchased for family use
Items purchased for household use
All of these are correct.
None of these are correct.
2. Which rule is not a GLBA consumer protection provision?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The Safeguards Rule
The Red Flags Rule
The Privacy Rule
The Pretexting Rule
None of these is correct.
3. Which federal agency regulates national banks?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
The Federal Reserve System
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
The Federal Trade Commission
4. What is the organization that promotes uniform reports among federal banking
institutions?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The Fed
The FFIEC
The FTC
The NCUA
The SEC
5. What is a Red Flag?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A crime
An activity that prevents identity theft
An activity that might indicate identity theft
An activity that mitigates identity theft
None of these is correct.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.6. Pretexting is also called ________.
7. Which of the following is nonpublic personal information?
A. Personally identifiable financial information provided by a customer to a
financial institution
B. Personally identifiable financial information provided by a financial institution
to a customer
C. Personally identifiable financial information provided by a financial institution
to an affiliate
D. Personally identifiable financial information provided by an affiliate to a
financial institution
E. Personally identifiable financial information provided by an affiliate to a
customer
8. A written information security program under the Safeguards Rule must include:
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Technical safeguards.
Physical safeguards.
Administrative safeguards.
A designated employee to run the program.
All of these are correct.
9. The ________ established the national banking system in the United States.
10. What is the central bank of the United States?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The FDIC
The Fed
The NCUA
The OCC
The CFPB
11. Which of the following is not a federal bank regulatory agency?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The FDIC
The NCUA
The FTC
The OCC
The Fed
12. What customer option must be included in a privacy practices notice?
A. Disclosure
B. Opt-out
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.C. Opt-in
D. Notice
E. None of these is correct.
13. The Payment Card Industry Standard includes ________ categories of security
requirements.
14. The Payment Card Industry Standards are enforced by the Federal Trade
Commission.
A. True
B. False
15. What is a customer?
A consumer with a past relationship with a financial institution
A consumer with no relationship with a financial institution
A consumer with a continuing relationship with a financial institution
A consumer who wants to enter into a relationship with a financial institution
None of these is correct.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.ENDNOTES
1. Verizon, “2019 Data Breach Investigations Report,” 2019.
https://enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/dbir/ (accessed April 29, 2020).
2. Secureworks, “A Famous Data Security Breach & PCI Case Study: Four Years
Later,” October 25, 2012. https://www.secureworks.com/blog/general-pci-
compliance-data-security-case-study-heartland (accessed April 29, 2020).
3. Ponemon Institute, “The Cost of Cybercrime,” 2019.
https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/pdf-96/accenture-2019-cost-of-
cybercrime-study-final.pdf#zoom=50 (accessed April 29, 2020).
4. National Bank Act (1864), 13 Stat. 99 (1864), current version at U.S. Code Vol.
12.
5. Fair Credit Reporting Act (1970), U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 1681, et seq.
6. U.S. Code Vol. 31, sec. 5312.
7. Bank Secrecy Act (1970), Pub. L. No. 91-508, 84 Stat. 1114 to 1124, codified as
amended in scattered sections throughout U.S. Code Vols. 12, 15, and 31.
8. Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (1999), Title V of the Financial Services Modernization
Act of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338, codified at U.S. Code Vol. 15,
sec. 6801, et seq.
9. U.S. Code Vol. 12, sec. 1843(k)(4).
10. American Bankers Association, “Digital Banking Infographic,” November 12,
2019. https://www.aba.com/news-research/research-analysis/digital-banking
(accessed April 29, 2020).
11. Federal Reserve Act (1913), Pub. L. No 63-43, 38 Stat. 251, codified as
amended throughout U.S. Code Vol. 12.
12. CNN, “America’s Economy Just Had Its Worst Quarter Since 2008,” April 29,
2020. https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/29/economy/us-economy-downturn-
coronavirus/index.html (accessed April 29, 2020).
13. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, “Structure of the Federal
Reserve System,” March 3, 2017.
https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/structure-federal-reserve-
system.htm (accessed April 29, 2020).
14. Banking Act of 1933 (also called the Glass-Stegall Act), Pub. L. No. 73-66, 48
Stat. 162, codified as amended throughout U.S. Code Vol. 12.
15. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, “Who Is the FDIC?” May 3, 2017.
https://www.fdic.gov/about/learn/symbol/index.html (accessed April 29, 2020).
16. Federal Credit Union Act (1934), U.S. Code Vol. 12, sec. 1751, et seq.
17. National Credit Union Association, “About NCUA,” Undated.
https://www.ncua.gov/about-ncua (accessed April 29, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.18. Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, “Who We Are,” Undated.
https://www.occ.treas.gov/about/who-we-are/index-who-we-are.html (accessed
April 29, 2020).
19. Financial Institutions Regulatory and Interest Rate Control Act (1978), Pub. L.
No. 95-630, 92 Stat. 3641, codified as amended in scattered sections of U.S.
Code.
20. U.S. Code Vol. 12, sec. 3305.
21. Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, “Annual Report 2019,”
March 30, 2020. https://www.ffiec.gov/PDF/annrpt19.pdf (accessed April 29,
2020).
22. Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, “Creating the Consumer Bureau,”
Undated. https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-
bureau/creatingthebureau/ (accessed April 29, 2020).
23. Federal Trade Commission Act (1914), U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 41–58.
24. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 46(a).
25. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 45(a)(1).
26. Federal Trade Commission, “About the FTC,” Undated.
https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc (accessed April 29, 2020).
27. Federal Trade Commission, “Federal Trade Commission, Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau Pledge to Work Together to Protect Consumers,” January 23,
2012. https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2012/01/federal-trade-
commission-consumer-financial-protection-bureau (accessed April 29, 2020).
28. Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (1999), Title V of the Financial Services Modernization
Act of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338, codified at U.S. Code Vol. 15,
sec. 6801, et seq.
29. U.S. Code Vol. 12, sec. 1843(k)(4).
30. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6801(a).
31. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6809.
32. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6801–6803.
33. Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (2010), Pub. L.
No. 111–203, 124 Stat. 1376–2223, codified as amended in scattered sections
throughout U.S. Code Vols. 12 and 15.
34. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 12, sec. 1016.
35. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6809.
36. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6803.
37. U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6802.
38. Privacy Rights Clearinghouse, “Oversight Hearing on Financial Privacy and the
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Financial Services Modernization Act: Testimony for U.S.
Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs,” September 20,
2002. https://privacyrights.org/resources/oversight-hearing-financial-privacy-
and-gramm-leach-bliley-financial-services (accessed April 29, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, sec. 313.
U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6801(b).
U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6805(b)(2).
Standards for Insuring the Security Confidentiality, Integrity and Protection of
Customer Records and Information (“Safeguards Rule”), Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 16, sec. 314.
U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 6821.
Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003 (FACTA), Pub L. No. 108-159,
117 Stat. 1952, made amendments to the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, sec. 681.1, Appendix A.
Federal Register 72, No. 217 at 63,719, background information.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, sec. 681.1(b)(9).
U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 1681a(r)(5).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, sec. 681.1(b)(3)(i).
Red Flag Program Clarification Act of 2010, 15 U.S.C. 1681m(e)(4), Pub. L. No.
111-319, 124 Stat. 3457 (Dec. 18, 2010).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, sec. 681.1, Appendix A.
American Bankers Association, “Credit Card Monitor,” February 2020.
https://www.aba.com/-/media/documents/reports-and-surveys/2019-q3-credit-
card-monitor.pdf?rev=9c1664304c9149a8a08e6d146791126f (accessed April
29, 2020).
PCI Security Standards Council, “About Us,” Undated.
https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/about_us/ (accessed April 29, 2020).
PCI Security Standards Council, “PCI Data Security Standard, v 3.2.1,” May
2018. https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/document_library (accessed April
29, 2020).
VISA, “PCI Compliance Helps Keep You and Your Customers Safe,” Undated.
https://usa.visa.com/support/small-business/security-compliance.html (accessed
April 29, 2020).
Mastercard, “What Merchants Need to Know About Securing Transactions,”
Undated. https://www.mastercard.ca/en-ca/merchants/safety-security/security-
recommendations/merchants-need-to-know.html (accessed April 29, 2020).
VISA, “Information Security,” Undated. https://cw.visa.com/run-your-
business/small-business/information-security/compliance-validation.html
(accessed April 29, 2020).
PCI Security Standards Council, “PCI Data Security Standard, v 3.2.1,” May
2018. https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/document_library (accessed April
29, 2020).
VISA, “What to Do if Compromised,” October 1, 2019.
https://usa.visa.com/dam/VCOM/download/merchants/cisp-what-to-do-if-
compromised.pdf (accessed April 29, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.60. Target Corporation, “Target Confirms Unauthorized Access to Payment Card
Data in U.S. Stores,” December 19, 2013.
https://corporate.target.com/press/releases/2013/12/target-confirms-
unauthorized-access-to-payment-car (accessed April 29, 2020).
61. Target Corporation, “Target Provides Update on Data Breach and Financial
Performance,” January 10, 2014.
https://corporate.target.com/press/releases/2014/01/target-provides-update-on-
data-breach-and-financia (accessed April 29, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:43:29.
