CHAPTER
15
Computer Forensics and
Investigations
OMPUTER FORENSICS IS the scientific process of collecting and examining
data stored on, received from, or transmitted by an electronic device. It is a
demanding area of study. New technologies that store data are created every day.
People who choose to work in this area must constantly study these new
technologies. They must learn how to collect and examine data from devices that
use the new technology. Computer forensics is also a rapidly expanding profession.
The U.S. Department of Labor estimates higher-than-average job growth for people
in this career. 1
C
This chapter introduces basic concepts about computer forensics. It also
discusses the role of the computer forensic examiner. Finally, it reviews legal issues
surrounding how digital evidence is gathered and used.
Chapter 15 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
What computer forensics is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.What a computer forensic examiner does
What the general rules for collecting, handling, and using digital
evidence are
What some legal issues regarding the seizure of digital evidence are
Chapter 15 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Define computer forensics
Explain the role of a computer forensic examiner
Explain why digital evidence must be carefully handled
Describe why chain of custody is important
Explain the laws that affect the collection of digital evidence
Describe concerns regarding the admissibility of digital evidence
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.What Is Computer Forensics?
Computer forensics is the scientific process for examining data stored on, received
from, or transmitted by electronic devices. The data is examined to find evidence
about an event or crime. Law enforcement uses computer forensics to investigate
almost any type of crime. Consider the following:
Illinois state prosecutors used cell phone records and data gathered by computer
forensic examiners to convict a defendant of murdering two people. The defendant
had used his computer to search “hire a hit man.” He had also searched for
directions from his home to the victim’s home. The case was unique because
almost no physical evidence existed to link the defendant to the murders. A judge
sentenced him to life in prison.
A Hong Kong shipping company pleaded guilty to violating U.S. pollution laws and
was fined $10 million. A ship operated by the company ran into the San Francisco
Bay Bridge and spilled more than 50,000 gallons of fuel into the San Francisco
Bay. Computer forensic examiners found that someone on the ship altered its
computerized navigation charts after the crash.
The U.S. Department of Justice charged nine foreign nationals with stealing more
than 31 terabytes of data from U.S. colleges and universities, companies, and
government agencies. Computer forensic examiners found that the hackers used
several different tactics to gain access to the stolen data.
Computer forensics has many different names. It is also called system or digital
forensics, computer forensic analysis, computer examination, data recovery, and
sometimes inforensics (information forensics). These terms are used
interchangeably. This chapter uses the term computer forensics.
NOTE
The word forensics is from the Latin word forensis, which means “belonging to the forum.” It refers to the
types of arguments used in a court or public forum to prove or disprove past theories or arguments.
Computer forensic examiners use specialized software and tools to collect and
study data stored on electronic devices. The evidence collected is called digital
evidence or just electronic evidence. Computer forensics includes all the steps
through which this evidence is collected, preserved, analyzed, documented, and
presented. 2 The goal of computer forensics is to find evidence that helps
investigators analyze an event or incident.
Computer forensic examiners study and collect electronic data for many reasons.
They do not just investigate crimes. Other computer forensics uses include:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Individuals—People may hire computer forensic examiners to find evidence to
support tort claims. They can find digital evidence about sexual harassment or
discrimination. Examiners also can uncover evidence for any type of civil litigation.
They also can find evidence to support a criminal defense case.
Military—The military uses computer forensics to gather intelligence information
to support its operations. It also uses computer forensics to prepare for and
respond to cyberattacks.
Organizations—Organizations use computer forensics the same ways that
individuals use it. Computer forensic examiners also can investigate employee
wrongdoing. They can look for embezzlement or theft of intellectual property (IP).
They also can look for unauthorized use of information technology (IT) resources
and attempts to harm them. An organization’s incident response (IR) program can
include forensic activities.
Colleges and universities—Many colleges and universities offer programs in
computer forensics. Some may have forensic research programs. They also use
computer forensics for the institution’s own IR activities.
Data recovery firms—Data recovery firms use computer forensics to rescue data
for their clients. They also advise clients how to keep data safe from loss.
Most electronic devices hold some type of data. Computer forensics can study any
of them. Potential sources of digital evidence include:
Computer systems—This includes laptop and desktop computers, as well as
servers. It also includes the hardware and software that the system uses. This
category also includes peripheral devices that can be attached to computer
systems. These devices enhance the user experience. They may include
keyboards, microphones, web cameras, and memory card readers.
Storage devices—This includes internal and external hard drives, as well as
removable media such as floppy disks, Zip disks, compact discs (CDs), digital
versatile discs (DVDs), thumb flash drives, and memory cards.
Mobile devices—This includes cell phones and smartphones. It also includes
tablets, personal digital assistants (PDAs), and pagers. Global positioning system
(GPS) devices hold data as well. Digital and video cameras, and audio and video
multimedia devices, also fall into this category.
Networking equipment—This includes network hubs, routers, servers, switches,
and power supplies. Networking equipment can be wired or wireless.
Other potential sources—Any device with computer capabilities can potentially
hold digital evidence. For example, many office devices have data storage ability.
This includes copiers and fax machines, answering machines, printers, and
scanners. Entertainment devices store data as well. They include digital video
recorders (DVRs), digital audio recorders, and video game systems. Surveillance
equipment is included in this category. This category includes any device not
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.already mentioned that can store data. Any Internet of Things (IoT) device can
also potentially hold digital evidence because these devices collect data via
sensors and transmit it via the internet. Fitness trackers, medical devices,
environmental sensors, and even industrial equipment all have data that can be
used as digital evidence.
People’s dependence on electronic devices to live their lives continues to grow.
Therefore, computer forensics as a special area of study also grows. Computer
forensic examiners are not always experts in collecting data from every possible type
of electronic device. They often focus on certain types of devices. In addition, most
computer forensic examiners focus their skills in specific areas. The three main
areas of computer forensics are:
Media analysis
Code analysis
Network analysis
Media analysis focuses on collecting and examining data stored on physical media.
This includes computer systems and storage devices. It also includes mobile
devices. When people think about computer forensics, they most often think about
media analysis. This type of analysis discovers normal and deleted data. It also finds
encrypted, hidden, and password-protected data. This chapter focuses mostly on
media analysis concepts. These concepts apply to other types of computer forensic
analysis as well.
Code analysis, also called malware forensics, focuses on reviewing
programming code. This area looks for malicious code or signatures from viruses,
worms, and Trojans. It looks for the signature of anything that has modified a system
without permission. A signature is the executable part of a malicious code. The need
for code analysis continues to grow as malware types change. A 2019 report
estimated a rise of almost 14 percent in different types of malware during that year. 3
NOTE
Most antivirus programs use signatures to help them detect malware on a computer system.
Network analysis focuses on collecting and examining network traffic. An
examiner reviews transaction logs and uses real-time monitoring to find evidence.
Organizations often use this type of analysis to investigate incidents.
Some computer forensic examiners also might have specialties within these
three major categories. For example, some examiners might specialize in email
forensics. Email forensics, which includes a combination of media and network
analysis, is used to find the sender, recipient, date, time, location information, and
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.contents of email messages. This is a hot area as almost 94 percent of all malware
was delivered via email in 2019. 4 As technology advances, it is not unusual to find
examiners with very specialized skills. FIGURE 15-1 shows examples of different
computer forensic categories.
FIGURE 15-1
Computer forensic categories.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.What Is the Role of a Computer Forensic
Examiner?
Computer forensics is a fairly new field. It is only a few decades old, but is growing
quickly. In 1984, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) began creating
software programs to collect computer evidence. 5 In 1990, the International
Association of Computer Investigative Specialists (IACIS) was formed. The IACIS,
the oldest computer forensic professional group, was the first group dedicated to
computer forensics. 6
The first international conference on computer forensics was held in 1993. In
1995, the International Organization on Computer Evidence (IOCE) was formed.
Although the IOCE no longer exists, it created some of the earliest guiding principles
for computer forensic examiners. In the United States, the Scientific Working Group
on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) was created in 1998 to participate in IOCE efforts. 7
NOTE
The scientific method is a way to answer questions in a repeatable and verifiable way. It is a formal
method of investigation.
Computer forensic examiners find evidence on electronic devices and collect it
for both civil and criminal cases. They must collect this evidence in a scientific
manner, regardless of the underlying case. They also must have a full understanding
of various technologies, hardware, and software. An examiner helps answer who,
what, where, when, why, and how.
A computer forensic examiner must have the following traits:
A sound knowledge of computing technologies
Use of the scientific method to conduct repeatable and verifiable examinations
Understanding of the laws of evidence and legal procedure
Access to computer forensic tools and the skill to use them
Outstanding record-keeping skills
No matter how careful they are, people always leave traces of their activities when
they interact with other people and with their surroundings. This is a basic principle
of forensic science known as Locard’s exchange principle. It applies to both the
digital world and the physical world. If people attempt to steal electronic information
or delete incriminating files, they leave electronic traces of their activities. For
example, log information can document these activities. A computer forensic
examiner needs to know how to find this trace evidence material, which is used to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.help prove a person’s actions in a computer system.
Computer forensic examiners do more than turn on a computer and search
through files. They must perform complex data recovery procedures. In particular,
they must:
NOTE
Dr. Edmond Locard was a forensics pioneer who lived from 1877 to 1966. He argued that scientific
methods should be applied to criminal investigations. He believed that when people or objects interact,
they transfer physical evidence to one another. Forensic scientists recover that evidence, then study and
learn from it.
Protect the data on any electronic device.
Avoid deleting, damaging, or altering data in any way on any electronic device.
Make exact copies of electronic data without altering the original device.
Discover normal, deleted, password-protected, hidden, and encrypted files.
Study data to create timelines of electronic activity.
Identify files and data that may be relevant to a case.
Fully document all evidence-collection activities.
Provide expert testimony on the steps taken to recover digital evidence.
Computer forensic examiners must have special skills beyond those of the traditional
information security professional. The law requires that computer forensic examiners
be competent at what they do. Examiners can show that they are competent by
earning advanced degrees. They also can become certified. Because the profession
is still relatively new and evolving rapidly, there are many computer forensic
certifications to choose from. Both independent organizations and vendors offer
them.
States and courts struggle with how to make sure computer forensic
examinations are done only by competent examiners. Courts rely on legal principles
and trial rules to screen examiners before they testify. Sometimes states create laws
that govern the activities of these examiners. Often, computer forensic examiners
are governed under the broad terms of a state’s private detective laws.
Many states regulate private detectives and investigators. They require a private
detective to have a state-issued license before he or she can conduct investigations.
These laws were created before computer forensics existed as a separate field. The
broad language of these laws can pull computer forensic examiners within the scope
of these regulated professions. This is not unusual.
Computer Forensic Examiner Certifications
There are many independent and vendor-specific computer forensic credentials. An examiner must weigh
which credential best suits his or her career path. The following are popular credentials:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Certified Computer Examiner (CCE)—The International Society of Forensic Computer Examiners
(ISFCE) offers the CCE. The ISFCE has offered the CCE, a vendor-neutral certification, since 2003.
CCE holders have basic knowledge of forensic examination procedures. You can learn more at
http://www.isfce.com/.
Certified Computer Forensics Examiner (CCFE)—The Information Assurance Certification Review
Board (IACRB) offers the CCFE, which is also vendor neutral. CCFE candidates must take a written
exam and a practical application test. There are nine subject-matter areas in the CCFE exam. You can
learn more at http://www.iacertification.org/index.htm.
Certified Forensic Computer Examiner (CFCE)—The IACIS offers the CFCE. However, only law
enforcement personnel may earn it. It is vendor neutral. CFCE candidates must pass an intensive
practical exam. You can learn more at http://www.iacis.com/.
GIAC Certified Forensic Analyst (GCFA)—The Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC)
program offers the GCFA. Similar to the CCE and CCFE, this certification also tests practical
knowledge. It is vendor neutral. GIAC offers several certifications related to digital forensics. You can
learn about GIAC at http://www.giac.org/.
Some forensic software vendors offer certifications for their products. For example, EnCase is a popular
forensic tool sold by Guidance Software. It offers the EnCase Certified Examiner (EnCE) credential. The
EnCE exam has a written section and a practical section. The practical section covers use of the EnCase
forensics program. You can learn more at https://www.opentext.com/products-and-solutions/services/training-
and-learning-services/encase-training/examiner-certification.
Another software vendor that offers a certification is AccessData. AccessData offers
a product called the Forensic Toolkit, but is better known as FTK. AccessData offers
the AccessData Certified Examiner (ACE) credential, which tests knowledge of the
FTK tool. The ACE exam is a multiple-choice test. You can learn more at
https://accessdata.com/training/computer-forensics-certification.
Some states require computer forensic examiners to have a private detective
license. Examples include Illinois, 8 Michigan, 9 Oregon, 10 and Texas. 11 In Texas, the
law is interpreted very broadly. It actually includes computer technicians and
computer repair personnel within the scope of its law.
Some states do not include computer forensic examiners within their private
detective licensing laws. North Carolina 12 and Virginia 13 are examples. North
Carolina law states that any person who performs computer forensic services in
order to collect evidence is not a private investigator. The North Carolina law also
excludes examiners who provide expert testimony, as well as any person who
engages in network or system vulnerability testing.
In 2008, the American Bar Association (ABA) issued a report and resolution on
computer forensic examiners. The ABA asked states to stop requiring computer
forensic examiners to get a private detective license. It said that the role of private
detectives is different from that of computer forensic examiners. It also stated that
courts have broad discretion to make sure that digital evidence used in trials is
reliable. Because the courts have that discretion, the ABA argued that there is no
need to license computer forensic examiners. 14
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Collecting, Handling, and Using Digital
Evidence
Computer forensic examiners find evidence on electronic devices and use this
evidence to help reconstruct past events or activities. They use the evidence to gain
a better understanding of a crime or event. It can be used to show possession and
use of digital data. This section discusses how computer forensic examiners collect
digital evidence. It focuses on how this evidence is collected in a criminal
investigation. You need to keep in mind that almost the same process will be used in
a civil investigation. An organization’s IR process also will be similar.
A computer, or any electronic device, can play one of four roles in computer
crime:
NOTE
Computer forensic examiners should always collect digital evidence in a reliable (forensically sound)
manner. The nature of the underlying investigation does not matter. The examiner should always use a
reliable and repeatable process.
To commit a crime—Unauthorized access to data (hacking) and online fraud are
two examples where a computer is used to commit a crime.
To facilitate a crime— Cyberstalking, identity theft, phishing scams, and software
piracy are examples of crimes facilitated, or aided, by computers.
As a target of crime—Denial of service (DoS) and distributed denial of service
(DDoS) attacks, computer viruses, and communications sabotage are examples of
crimes where the computer itself is the target of the crime.
As a witness to crime—Computerized record-keeping systems may provide
evidence of an underlying crime or event.
If the computer forensic examiner knows how the computer was used, he or she will
be able to tailor the examination to that use.
FYI
It is important that evidence used in a court case be admissible because a judge or jury can consider only
admissible evidence when they decide cases. Evidence that is invalid for some reason is called
inadmissible evidence and cannot be presented to a judge or jury. A judge or jury who accidentally hears
about that evidence cannot consider it later in deliberations. Admissible evidence is good evidence,
whereas inadmissible evidence is bad evidence.
The examiner must gather evidence in a way that makes it admissible in court.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Evidence is useful only if it is admissible. To be admissible, evidence must be
collected in a lawful way. It also must be collected in a scientific manner. For digital
evidence, this means that a computer forensic examiner conducts a repeatable and
verifiable examination of an electronic device. The examiner must use established
practices and procedures. The examiner also must be able to explain the results of
his or her work to a client, judge, or jury in a clear way.
The Investigative Process
Different law enforcement agencies and organizations may use different
investigative processes. The process used can depend on the type of case, as well
as the urgency of the case. The process also can depend on the agency or
organization that performs the investigation. In general, the investigative process has
the following basic steps:
Identification
Preservation
Collection
Examination
Presentation
This basic process is used by both law enforcement agencies and other
organizations to identify, collect, and preserve digital evidence.
Identification
During the identification step, the computer forensic examiner learns about the
crime, event, or activity that is being investigated. He or she must identify the types
of electronic devices that may be involved and prepare to conduct the investigation.
The examiner must make sure that he or she has all the tools needed to conduct the
investigation. A computer forensic examiner’s approach to a case may depend
heavily on its facts and circumstances.
Preservation
During the preservation step, computer forensic examiners must secure the crime
scene and any electronic devices. This means that they must make sure that no one
tampers with the scene or electronic devices. This is to make sure that suspects and
witnesses do not have a chance to access, destroy, or modify digital evidence.
Examiners also must make sure that no one can access electronic devices remotely
once they are seized. All of these actions make sure that potential digital evidence
cannot be altered. This step is very important because once digital evidence is
altered, it is difficult, if not impossible, to reverse the results.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Chain of Custody
The chain of custody is an important evidentiary concept. Courts and attorneys use a chain of custody
document to help prove that evidence is admissible. This document shows who obtained evidence, where
and when it was obtained, who secured it, and who had control or possession of it. It is used to prove that
evidence is reliable.
Evidence is reliable when it is not destroyed, changed, or altered. It cannot be modified after it is originally
collected. A court may find that evidence is not admissible in court if its chain of custody is poorly
documented or incomplete. A chain of custody protects the integrity of evidence.
A chain of custody documents how evidence is collected, used, and handled throughout the lifetime of a
particular case. It is a journal that records every interaction that a person or object has with the evidence.
In some instances, the examiner may not be able to take electronic devices away
from the crime scene. In these instances, they must collect data on-site, which
requires additional expertise. This might happen in cases where evidence is located
on an organization’s business computers. It also might be the case if the computers
belong to a witness and not to a criminal suspect. Sometimes the examiners may not
be able to seize electronic devices if there is a concern that the devices are being
used as part of a larger ongoing criminal activity that is being investigated.
Computer forensic examiners also should learn about the operation of the
electronic devices they will be examining. They will want to gather information from
people at the scene to learn how the devices are used. They should try to learn
logon names and passwords for access to the devices. They also should try to
discover the type of internet access used by each electronic device and programs
used on each device. It is also important for examiners to know whether devices are
encrypted, or whether they are equipped with software that could destroy evidence.
This step also includes documenting the crime scene. Examiners must record the
location of all electronic devices. They also should note whether the device is on or
off. They should record the condition of all devices. Examiners also should record
the content of any display screens before electronic devices are moved. The crime
scene can be documented using video, photos, and written notes. The
documentation created at this step is important for creating a chain of custody.
Collection
The collection step also is known as the “bag and tag” step. During this step,
computer forensic examiners must collect the electronic devices. These devices
require special collection, packaging, and transportation in order to preserve
potential evidence. Examiners will collect electronic devices in different ways
depending upon the device and its power status. They will follow different rules for
devices that are on and devices that are off.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.
FYISlack space is the space between the end of a data file and the end of the disk space that is allocated to
store it. Data does not always fill the whole space that is allocated to it. Residual information can be left
over when a smaller file is written into space that used to be occupied by a larger file. This leftover data
may be located in the slack space. Computer forensic examiners look at the slack space because it might
contain meaningful data.
Can a Person Be Compelled to Provide His or Her Encryption Key or
Password?
Many information security professionals advise their clients to use passwords, passcodes, biometric features,
or other “locks” on their electronic devices to help keep the client’s personal information safe. Often times
these passwords are used to encrypt and decrypt computing devices as well.
In cases where electronic devices are seized for evidence, these locks and encryption keys can be a problem
for a computer forensic examiner. Can the government compel a data owner to provide a password,
passcode, or encryption key for an electronic device? Does requiring a suspect to provide this information
violate the person’s Fifth Amendment self-incrimination protections?
The U.S. Supreme Court has held that the Fifth Amendment protects communications that are compelled,
testimonial, and incriminating in nature. 15 For instance, a defendant can potentially incriminate himself or
herself if compelled to disclose information—such as a password or passcode—needed to access an
electronic device. Under this established case law, a defendant usually does not have to share the contents
of his or her mind.
The heart of the issue is whether providing a password, passcode, biometric identifier, encryption key, or
some other unlocking mechanism is testimonial. Case law in this area continues to develop rapidly and there
is a lot of uncertainty among the courts. At the time that this text was written, general rules of thumb that can
be gleaned from case law include:
Passwords, passcodes, and other electronic device locking mechanisms that are stored in a person’s
mind are more likely to receive protection under the Fifth Amendment. Compelling a person to share
this information is testimonial—it forces the person to share a fact that could be used against him or
her.
Passwords, passcodes, and other electronic device locking mechanisms that are based on biometric
identifiers (e.g., biometric device locking mechanisms) are less likely to receive protection under the
Fifth Amendment. Compelling the production of this type of information is not testimonial because the
information is something that a person is. The Fifth Amendment does not protect a person against the
collection of physical features or acts. A person can be compelled to provide a blood sample, stand in a
line-up, or provide a handwriting sample because these actions are not testimonial. Many courts have
held that compelling a person to open his or her electronic device protected with a biometric device
locking mechanism (e.g., fingerprint or facial identification) is not unconstitutional.
These general rules highlight a tension between protections afforded by the law, protections afforded by
technology, and user convenience. Although biometric device locking mechanisms provide tremendous
convenience for the user, the data stored on devices protected in this way may not be afforded legal
protection from government searches. Some smartphone manufacturers are trying to merge the best of both
worlds by creating features to quickly disable biometric device locking mechanisms in situations where the
device owner might be worried that a law enforcement officer will try to force the owner to unlock his or her
device. Some people refer to these disabling features as “the cop button.” When these features are used, all
biometric device locking mechanism features are disabled and the smartphone reverts to requiring a
password or passcode to unlock the device. Under current law, to best protect the contents of electronic
devices from exposure in criminal legal proceedings, the devices should be protected by the longest
password or passcode that the device allows.
This same analysis and the general rules shared in this section will likely be applied to passwords,
passcodes, and biometric device locking mechanisms for internet-enhanced applications and services.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Device users must weigh the risk of incriminating data exposure with convenience. Although it may be
convenient to protect a password manager application on a smartphone with fingerprint or facial
identification, such applications may contain hundreds of passwords. Where possible, those types of
applications should always be protected with a strong password or passcode (that is different from the device
password or passcode).
This particular topic of the law continues to evolve. You can expect judges to continue to define the scope of
the Fifth Amendment in these situations. Because this is an area of federal constitutional law, the U.S.
Supreme Court has the power to make a decision on the issue.
For example, in most instances, a cell phone must be kept powered on in order
to preserve data stored on the device. However, it must be protected from any
incoming calls or text messages that could change the data on it. The cell phone
must be packaged and transported in a special evidence bag once it is collected.
These special evidence bags, called Faraday bags, keep a cell phone shielded from
incoming calls or from connecting to wireless networks. This is so that data stored on
it cannot be changed by an incoming call or wireless network connection. A
computer forensic examiner also must make sure that the collected cell phone has
an additional power supply to maintain evidence that could be lost if its battery runs
out.
During this step, examiners must be aware of other kinds of evidence that could
be on electronic devices. For example, a keyboard or mouse could contain
fingerprints or other physical evidence related to the case. Computer forensic
examiners must work with other forensic technicians to make sure that this type of
physical evidence is not destroyed.
As a practical matter, examiners must document how all electronic devices are
configured. The cables and peripheral devices that are hooked up to each computer
will need to be tagged. Examiners also must collect any manuals or other materials
about the electronic devices that are located near the crime scene.
Examination
During the examination step, computer forensic examiners will want to make
duplicate images of any electronic storage media. This is called imaging. One thing
to remember is that a forensic duplicate image is not the same as a file copy or
system backup copy. This type of image is an exact copy of the storage media. It
includes deleted files, slack space, and areas of the storage media that a normal file
copy would not include. A forensic duplicate image is a bit-by-bit copy of the original
storage media.
Computer forensic examiners use special tools called write blockers to create
forensic duplicate images. These tools keep examiners from altering the original
storage media. Write blockers can be either hardware- or software-based. They work
similar to a one-way flow valve in plumbing in that they only allow data to move in
one direction. Most examiners will make two or more duplicate images of the original
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.storage media. One copy is a working copy that they will use to look for evidence.
The other is a control copy that can be used if something goes wrong with the first
copy.
A forensic duplicate image must be verified against the original storage media.
This makes sure that the duplicate image is identical to the original and that nothing
has changed on the original media or the image. Examiners verify the images using
a cryptographic equation called an algorithm. They will apply the algorithm to the
original media to create a hash, the value that is the result of the cryptographic
equation on the image. The examiner will apply the same algorithm to the duplicate
image to create another hash.
The examiner can prove that the duplicate image accurately represents the
original media if the hashes are the same. If the hashes are different, the images are
not the same. Different hashes mean that the imaging process was faulty or some
sort of change took place between the original media and the duplicate image.
Hashes are used to measure the integrity of the original media and the forensic
duplicate. If the hashes do not match, then the data has changed somehow.
NOTE
The output of a hashing algorithm is sometimes called a checksum.
Computer forensic examiners need to know how to collect two very different
types of data. Persistent data is stored on a hard drive or other storage media and
is preserved when an electronic device is turned off. Volatile data, in contrast, is
stored in memory and exists in registries, the cache, and random access memory
(RAM), as well as the connections that one electronic device might have with
another while both devices are powered on. Volatile data is lost when an electronic
device is turned off, so examiners must know when this data must be collected and
how to do it.
Computer forensic examiners search for relevant information on the duplicate
image. They have checklists of items that they review and look for. In general, they
might look at:
File access history (when were files created, edited, and last accessed)
File download history
Internet browsing history
Attempts to delete or conceal files or other data
Email communications
Instant message or internet chat logs
Image files
Files containing address books or other contact information
Documents containing financial or medical information
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Examiners produce a report of files or data that might be relevant to the
investigation. They must use examination procedures that are auditable. That means
that an independent party can verify and repeat all of the same steps and receive the
same results.
Presentation
Computer forensic examiners must be able to report on their findings and describe
how they gathered digital evidence. They often have to explain how they collected
this evidence if a case goes to trial. Examiners are usually considered expert
witnesses when they testify in a court case. Expert witness testimony is governed by
the Federal Rules of Evidence. 16 Expert witnesses must show that their activities
followed a scientific methodology. A court assesses this process to make sure that
evidence offered at trial is reliable.
The test for measuring the reliability of a scientific methodology is called the
Daubert test. It was first discussed in a U.S. Supreme Court case called Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals. 17 This test is important to computer forensics. It
comes into play because of the tools that examiners use to collect digital evidence.
An expert witness is a person; therefore, the software tools used by examiners
cannot be expert witnesses. Thus, examiners must testify on behalf of the tools.
The American Academy of Forensic Sciences
The American Academy of Forensic Sciences (AAFS) recognizes computer forensics as a scientific
discipline. The AAFS, one of the most well-known professional organizations for forensic scientists, has
members from many different forensic disciplines. Its goals are to promote integrity and advance cooperation
in the forensic sciences.
The AAFS has different sections for different areas. For example, it created a digital and multimedia sciences
section in February 2008. The digital and multimedia sciences section was the first new AAFS section in 28
years. Members must show active participation in computer forensic activities. All AAFS members have
ethical rules that they must follow.
You can learn more about the AAFS at http://www.aafs.org.
The use of a tool must satisfy the Daubert test to show that the digital evidence
gathered by the tool is reliable. The Daubert test asks the following questions to
determine reliability:
Has the tool been tested?
Is there a known error rate for the tool?
Has the tool been peer reviewed?
Is the tool accepted in the relevant scientific community?
The examiner will testify about how the tool works. The examiner also will testify
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.about his or her qualifications as a computer forensic examiner. Finally, the examiner
will testify about the process the examiner used to collect the digital evidence. The
court will use the Daubert test to decide whether to admit the evidence collected by
the examiner.
Ethical Principles for Forensic Examination
Computer forensic examiners all follow some common principles. The IOCE created
one of the first sets of ethical principles for computer forensics examiners in 1999.
The IOCE principles included:
Examiners should not change digital evidence after they seize it.
If original digital evidence must be accessed, the person accessing it must be
competent.
All digital evidence handling must be fully documented and available for review.
Each person who handles digital evidence is responsible for it while it is in his or
her possession.
Any agency that handles digital evidence must comply with these principles. 18
These basic principles are followed in different forms by other organizations. For
example, the CCE credential requires CCE holders to follow a code of ethics. That
code of ethics has terms that are similar to the principles stated originally by the
IOCE. You can read the code of ethics at https://www.isfce.com/ethics2.htm.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Legal Issues Involving Digital Evidence
There are special rules for collecting and handling digital evidence. However, the
process for obtaining the electronic devices and the evidence on them in the first
place must follow established legal principles. The law asks two basic questions
about evidence:
Did the person or organization that collected the evidence have the legal authority
to do so?
Is the evidence admissible in court?
Legal principles and statutes are used to address the first question. These laws
focus on the situations where a private entity or the government can collect
information about a person.
Court rules and case law are used to address the second question. Both the
federal government and state governments have trial court rules for civil and criminal
proceedings. In addition to these rules, federal and state courts have evidentiary
rules that govern how parties introduce evidence at trials. This chapter uses the
Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE) to illustrate admissibility requirements. Many states
have their own evidence rules that are based on the FRE.
One thing to keep in mind as you review this section is that there are differences
between how law enforcement and private entities conduct investigations. Law
enforcement agencies have very specific rules that they must follow when they
collect evidence because a law enforcement agency is acting on behalf of a
government. They are agents of either the federal or a state government. In the
United States, a government cannot take some actions against its citizens without
proper authority. This is part of our “checks and balances” system of government.
For example, unless special circumstances exist, law enforcement must get
permission from a court to monitor a person’s telephone conversations.
The rules are different for private entities. Private entities are individuals and
organizations that are not related to a governmental agency. As long as a private
entity is acting within the rule of law, it may take certain actions to protect its own
interests. This is why an employer may monitor an employee’s telephone
conversations when the employee is using the employer’s telephone equipment. A
private entity generally has the right under the law to monitor and collect data about
its own IT resources in order to protect them.
Authority to Collect Evidence
There are many laws that define and limit the government’s ability to monitor and
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.collect data about individuals. The basic protections afforded to U.S. citizens stem
from the Constitution. The Fourth Amendment protects citizens from an intrusive
government.
Other laws further define how the government can collect and monitor data.
These laws affect the activities of computer forensic examiners. The Electronic
Communications Privacy Act, 20 the Wiretap Act, 21 and the Pen Register and Trap
and Trace Statute 22 are discussed in this section.
The Fourth Amendment and Search Warrants
The Fourth Amendment protects people from unreasonable government search and
seizure. A search happens when a person’s reasonable expectation of privacy in a
place or thing is compromised. A seizure happens when the government interferes
with a person’s property. Interference includes taking the property or using it in such
a way that the person who owns it cannot use it.
The Silver Platter Doctrine
The difference between the government’s ability to collect evidence of a crime and a private entity’s ability to
collect evidence about that same activity is an interesting area of study. It is also a complicated area of study.
The resolution of many court cases depends on these differences. Sometimes laws create special rules for
law enforcement and private entities.
For example, the Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA) 19 sets out the rules for access, use,
disclosure, and interception of stored electronic communications. Electronic communications include
telephone, cell phones, computers, email, faxes, and texting. Under the ECPA, no one may access the
contents of these communications unless it is allowed somewhere else in the ECPA. The law has different
rules for the government and for private entities.
The ECPA has strict rules for the government. For example, the government cannot access any stored
electronic communications without a search warrant. To get a search warrant, the government must prove to
a court that it has probable cause to believe that criminal activity is taking place. The stored communications
must hold evidence of the criminal activity. If the government cannot prove probable cause, then it cannot
access these communications.
The ECPA has different rules for private entities. Private entities may access stored communications within
their ordinary course of business. To use this exception, the private entity must have a legitimate business
interest for accessing these communications. They also must show that the access occurred on equipment
provided by a communications service provider. The ECPA also allows private entities to access employee
communications if the employee gives consent. The private entity must be able to prove that it provided
notice of access to its employees and that the employees consented to it. Most courts interpret these
exceptions very narrowly.
Sometimes private entities find evidence of criminal activity. The ECPA allows most types of private entities to
lawfully disclose this evidence to law enforcement agencies. This evidence often is very useful to a criminal
investigation. Sometimes a prosecutor will want to use this evidence at a criminal trial. The evidence rule
known as the silver platter doctrine applies in these cases. This rule is called the silver platter doctrine
because the private entity gives admissible evidence to law enforcement “on a silver platter.” Law
enforcement did not need a search warrant to access the evidence because it did not collect it or direct its
collection.
The silver platter doctrine allows the admission of evidence lawfully collected by a private entity. However, the
evidence collected by the private entity must be collected and documented properly. To take advantage of the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.silver platter doctrine, the government must show that the private entity is not affiliated with law enforcement
or a government (state or federal). The private entity must not be collecting the evidence under the direction
of law enforcement or a government. The private entity also cannot be an internet service provider (ISP).
There are special rules under the ECPA for ISPs.
The Fourth Amendment states that the government may not search or seize
areas and things in which a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy. If a
person has a reasonable expectation of privacy in a place or item, then the
government must get a search warrant before searching it or taking it. Under the
Fourth Amendment, the “government” includes law enforcement. This section uses
the terms government and law enforcement interchangeably.
Several court cases have held that people have a reasonable expectation of
privacy in their personal computers and mobile devices. The U.S. Court of Appeals
for the Ninth Circuit has found that a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy
in a personal computer. That case is called United States v. Heckenkamp. 23 Other
courts have held that people have a reasonable expectation of privacy in data stored
on personal pagers. 24 The U.S. Supreme Court has held that a warrant is required
before searching a cell phone, even when the cell phone is seized when its owner is
arrested. 25 It has also held that a person has a reasonable expectation of privacy in
the location information collected by his or her smartphone and stored by his or her
cell phone service provider. 26 To search any of these devices, law enforcement must
get a search warrant.
FYI
The Fourth Amendment applies to federal government actions only. However, most state governments
have state constitutional protections that are similar to the Fourth Amendment. The Fourth Amendment
does not apply to private individuals or entities that conduct searches or seizures. The private individual or
entity must act alone and without government direction. The Fourth Amendment may apply when a private
individual or entity follows government directions in conducting a search.
To get a search warrant, law enforcement must clearly specify the criminal
activity that is being investigated. It must describe where the search will take place
and also list the items that will be searched. Finally, law enforcement must state the
evidence that they expect to find. They also must state how that evidence relates to
the criminal activity that is being investigated.
If law enforcement conducts a search without a valid warrant, then any evidence
that it finds is not admissible in court. This means that a judge will not allow the
government to use that evidence to prove its case. Although the rule is strict, there
are some limited exceptions. Court-recognized exceptions to the Fourth
Amendment’s search warrant requirements include:
Consent—Law enforcement can search places and items if the person in control
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.of them freely consents to the search. For example, a person can allow law
enforcement to search his or her home, car, or computer. A person’s consent must
be free and voluntary. If law enforcement finds evidence of criminal activity during
a voluntary search, it is admissible in court. Cases reviewing this exception often
focus on whether a person’s consent really was free and voluntary.
Plain view doctrine—Law enforcement does not need a warrant to search and
seize evidence that is in an officer’s “plain view.” The officer must be able to see
the evidence from a place where the officer has a right to be. This exception is
often used to seize drugs or other contraband. For example, a police officer can
seize drug paraphernalia that he or she sees in a car if the officer can plainly see
the items in the car’s back seat while standing on a public street.
Exigent circumstances—Law enforcement is allowed to make a warrantless
search and seizure in emergency circumstances. This exception applies if public
safety would be harmed or evidence would be destroyed if law enforcement took
the time to go to court to get a warrant. This exception also is called the
“emergency” exception. Law enforcement often seizes drugs and weapons using
this exception. Court cases reviewing this exception focus on whether a true
emergency existed at the time the search or seizure took place.
Search incident to a lawful arrest—Law enforcement does not need a warrant to
search for weapons or contraband on the body of an arrested person. In some
cases, law enforcement may make a brief visual inspection of the area where a
person is arrested to make sure that no accomplices are hiding nearby. Law
enforcement officers are allowed to make these warrantless searches in order to
protect their own safety. They also can use this exception to make sure that critical
evidence is not destroyed during the arrest process. Courts strictly construe this
exception to make sure that it is not abused. This exception is also called the
protective sweep exception.
Inventory search—Law enforcement may conduct inventory searches without a
warrant when they arrest a suspect. These searches are allowed when they are
made for a non-investigative purpose. For example, if a suspect has a laptop
computer when he or she is arrested, law enforcement may seize the computer for
safekeeping while the suspect is in custody. This helps protect law enforcement
from claims that they lost or stole a suspect’s property. For the exception to apply,
the law enforcement agency must have standard policies and procedures for
conducting inventory searches. They also must document the search. Court cases
reviewing this exception focus on whether law enforcement was following a
documented policy for inventory searches. They review whether the inventory
search was a ploy to hide a more thorough search for evidence.
One important thing to keep in mind is that the Fourth Amendment search warrant
exceptions allow for the seizure of the media containing the digital evidence. Law
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.enforcement can seize the physical media only. If they want to conduct a forensic
examination of that media, they must get a warrant to do so. Therefore, the search
warrant must authorize the forensic examination. Unless emergency circumstances
exist, the secondary search warrant ensures that any digital evidence collected from
the media will be admissible in court. Computer forensic examiners must make sure
there is a valid search warrant for any electronic devices that they collect. They also
must make sure that the warrant allows them to search the data on the device.
Federal Laws Regarding Electronic Data Collection
Three main federal laws govern the collection of electronic communications data.
These laws cover many different communications, including email, radio and
electronic communications, data transmissions, and telephone calls. Computer
forensic examiners often study these communications when they investigate cases
or events. An examiner must make sure that his or her actions follow the law.
These laws forbid the use of eavesdropping technologies. This means that the
government, individuals, and private entities cannot use certain technologies to
snoop on electronic communications. The only time use of these technologies is
allowed is when the law says it is allowed. Usually this is when the law allows an
exception or if an entity has a court order. The three laws are:
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act
The Wiretap Act
The Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute
NOTE
Keep in mind that states also might have laws governing the collection of electronic communications
evidence. You must always review both federal and state laws when considering a legal issue.
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act. The ECPA, first passed in 1986,
governs the use, disclosure, and interception of stored electronic communications.
Congress has amended it several times. The ECPA governs access to the contents
of stored communications, as well as access to transmission data about the
communications. Transmission data includes header and log data. The ECPA does
not apply to real-time collection of electronic communications.
The ECPA is a complicated statute. Under the ECPA, no one may access the
contents of these communications unless it is allowed somewhere else in the ECPA.
There are different rules for the government and for private entities. For example, the
government cannot access any stored electronic communications without a search
warrant. If it accesses them without a warrant, any evidence that it discovers will not
be admissible. There are several exceptions to the ECPA for private entities. Some
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.of these exceptions were part of the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act (U.S.A. PATRIOT
Act). 27 Congress passed the PATRIOT Act, which modified parts of the ECPA, in
2001. Under the ECPA, a private entity may voluntarily disclose the contents of
stored communications to law enforcement. Law enforcement does not need a
search warrant if the private entity discloses the information voluntarily. (This is the
application of the silver platter doctrine.) As long as the evidence was collected and
documented properly, it will likely be admissible.
Private entity voluntary disclosure is permitted under the ECPA as long as the
private entity is not an ISP. If it is an ISP, then additional conditions must be met.
These conditions prevent ISPs from having to monitor all communications across
their networks. They also prevent ISPs from snooping on their subscribers and help
ISPs maintain their safe harbor protections under U.S. IP laws.
If an ISP wishes to disclose the contents of a communication to law enforcement,
the disclosure must fall under a permitted ECPA exception. If the disclosure does not
fall under one, then it may not be admissible in court. The permitted exceptions that
allow disclosure are:
The disclosure is made with the consent of the sender or receiver of the
communication.
The disclosure is related to the ISP’s services or is made to protect the ISP’s
rights.
The ISP inadvertently received the contents of the communication and the
contents appear to be related to criminal activity.
The ISP reasonably believes that disclosure is required to prevent an emergency
involving immediate danger of death or serious bodily injury.
U.S. child protection laws require the disclosure.
The disclosure is made in response to a court order. 28
The Wiretap Act. The ECPA applies to access to and disclosure of stored
communications only. The federal Wiretap Act governs real-time interception of the
contents of an electronic communication. The Act does not apply to transmission
information, but does apply to anyone who intentionally intercepts or tries to intercept
any wire, oral, or electronic communication. The Act forbids the real-time interception
of these communications. Communications covered by the Act include email, radio
communications, data transmissions, and telephone calls.
NOTE
The Wiretap Act also is known as “Title III.” This is because it was first passed as Title III of the Omnibus
Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.Under the Wiretap Act, no one is allowed to install wiretaps on telephones to
intercept telephonic communications. The Act also forbids using network sniffers to
intercept internet traffic or other computer-based communications. There are
exceptions to the Wiretap Act, however. For example, law enforcement can install
telephone wiretaps or network sniffers if it has a court order (warrant) to do so.
There are three main exceptions to the federal Wiretap Act for private entities.
Private entities can use these exceptions to monitor content on their own
communications systems. These exceptions are:
The Consent Exception
The Provider Exception
The Trespasser Exception
A private entity may monitor content on its own communications systems when one
of the parties to the communication consents to the monitoring. This is the consent
exception. One way that entities gather consent is by using network banners. A
network banner is a warning banner that provides notice of legal rights to the users
of computer networks. These banners are displayed when a computer user logs on
to a network or visits an entity’s home page.
These banners have many purposes. They are used to show consent to
monitoring under the Wiretap Act or consent to access under the ECPA. They are
also used to eliminate a user’s Fourth Amendment reasonable expectation of privacy
in a computer network. They also may be used to inform a user of the terms of use
for the computer network. Typically, these banners inform the user that use of the
network (after viewing the banner) is proof that the user consents to network
monitoring and the terms of use.
A private entity can monitor its communications systems to protect its “rights or
property.” This is called the provider exception. Monitoring under this exception must
be reasonable and done in the ordinary course of business. This exception belongs
only to the private entity, who may disclose evidence of business-related wrongdoing
on its systems to law enforcement. This exception is not a general exception. The
law does not allow a private entity to gather evidence of crime unrelated to it and
turn that evidence over to law enforcement.
NOTE
Under the Wiretap Act, a computer trespasser is a person who uses a computer system without
permission. A computer trespasser has no relationship at all with the private entity.
Court cases about the provider exception have upheld it in several situations. For
example, an entity’s system administrators can use this exception to monitor a
hacker’s communications within its network. They may do this to prevent damage to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.the entity’s network. 29 The entity can give any evidence collected from the monitoring
to law enforcement. This is because hacking into a computer network is illegal.
The trespasser exception was created in 2001 as part of the PATRIOT Act. This
exception recognizes that there might be times when private entities do not have the
expertise needed to track or monitor system intruders. Because they do not have the
skills to track system intruders, the provider exception is not helpful to them. The
trespasser exception allows the entity to ask the government to help in these
situations. The government can assist the entity in intercepting the communications
of a computer trespasser.
The following conditions must be met in order to use this exception:
Law enforcement must get the consent of the private entity.
The interception must be legal.
The interception must be part of a legitimate investigation.
The interception must not monitor the communications of anyone other than the
trespasser. 30
If these conditions are met, then law enforcement may help a private entity monitor a
computer trespasser. Law enforcement does not need a court order to take
advantage of this exception.
The Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute. The Wiretap Act governs real-time
interception of the contents of a communication. It does not apply to transmission
information. The Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute governs real-time
monitoring of this type of data. Transmission information includes headers, logs,
network routing, and other transmission data. This law does not apply to
communications content.
Under the Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute, no one is allowed to use
pen register or trap and trace devices to intercept electronic communications
transmission data. Similar to the Wiretap Act, however, some exceptions allow the
use of these devices. For example, the law allows law enforcement to install pen
register or trap and trace devices if they have a court order to do so.
NOTE
Pen register devices monitor outgoing transmission data. They record dialing, routing, signaling, or
address information. Trap and trace devices monitor the communications of incoming transmission data.
They capture incoming electronic signals that identify the origin of a communication.
There are three exceptions to the Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute for
private entities. Private entities can use these exceptions to use pen register or trap
and trace devices on their own communications systems. The exceptions are:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.A private entity may use pen register or trap and trace devices if necessary to
operate, maintain, or test its communication services. It also may use these
devices to protect its property rights. (This is similar to the provider exception
under the Wiretap Act.)
A private entity may use pen register or trap and trace devices to protect the entity
from fraudulent, unlawful, or abusive use of service. It would use these devices to
prove the existence of a fraudulent, unlawful, or abusive electronic
communication.
A private entity may use pen register or trap and trace devices when the user of
the electronic communications service consents.
These three laws, in addition to the provisions of the Fourth Amendment, are the
main federal laws that govern the collection of electronic communications evidence.
Computer forensic examiners must make sure that their evidence collection activities
comply with these laws. Computer forensic examiners must also follow any relevant
state laws. The examiner’s credibility is damaged if the examiner does not follow the
law. In addition, if the examiner does not follow the law, any evidence that he or she
gathered might not be admissible.
Admissibility of Evidence
Even if evidence is lawfully collected, it still must be admissible. At the federal level,
the main guidance regarding the submission of evidence at trial is the FRE. The FRE
apply to use of evidence at federal trials. Many states also have rules of evidence.
Often these rules are based on the federal rules. One thing to keep in mind
whenever you are reviewing evidence is that you need to understand whether you
must follow state rules or federal rules.
NOTE
In criminal cases, defense attorneys want to present exculpatory evidence to rebut the prosecution’s case.
The prosecution is interested in presenting inculpatory evidence to support their case.
Under the FRE, relevant evidence is admissible unless some other rule or law
says that it is not. Admissible evidence is evidence that the judge and jury can
consider when they deliberate about a case. Evidence can be either inculpatory or
exculpatory. Inculpatory evidence supports or confirms a given theory, whereas
exculpatory evidence rebuts or contradicts a given theory.
Computer forensic examiners are hired to find digital evidence. There are two
basic types of digital evidence:
Computer-generated records—These records and logs are the output of
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.computer programs. They are created automatically by a computer program or
process, even if a person initiates that program or process.
Records created by people and stored electronically—These records are
created by people. They just happen to be in a digital form. This kind of evidence
includes files, pictures, images, spreadsheets, and other documents created by a
person. It also can include internet browsing history.
The Fruit of the Poisonous Tree Doctrine
The fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine is a long-standing legal doctrine, whose name stems from a biblical
passage. 31 The doctrine has been in place since 1920. 32 The U.S. Supreme Court first used the term “fruit of
the poisonous tree” in 1939. 33 The doctrine prevents the government from using illegally gathered evidence
at a criminal trial. It also prevents the government from using any legally gathered evidence that it obtained
because of the illegally gathered evidence.
This doctrine is used to keep the government from violating people’s constitutional rights. If the government
were allowed to use illegally gathered evidence at trial, the protections granted by the Fourth Amendment
would be meaningless.
Under the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine, the poisonous tree is evidence that is seized illegally. The fruit
of the poisonous tree is evidence that is later gathered because of knowledge gained through the first illegal
act. Neither the tree, nor its fruit, can be used at a trial.
The rules of evidence apply to digital evidence in the same way that they apply to
traditional types of evidence. This section focuses on issues that are important for
digital evidence. In order to be admissible, digital evidence must be:
Lawfully gathered
Relevant
Authentic and reliable
Evidence is lawfully gathered if it is collected in accordance with the law. The main
laws that govern the collection of electronic evidence were discussed earlier in this
section. Evidence that is not gathered lawfully is tainted with illegality. This means
that it cannot be used in court. It also means that any subsequent evidence gathered
because of the illegally obtained evidence also cannot be used in court. In the law,
this is known as the fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine. This doctrine primarily
applies to criminal cases.
Evidence is admissible only if it is relevant. Another name for relevant evidence is
probative evidence. Probative evidence proves or disproves a legal element in a
case. If evidence is not probative, then it can be excluded from a trial. The FRE say
that evidence is relevant if it makes “the existence of any fact that is of consequence
to the determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be
without the evidence.” 34 Evidence can be inculpatory or exculpatory.
Relevance can occasionally be a problem for digital evidence. This is because it
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.is sometimes hard for judges and juries to understand very technical information.
They might not understand why the evidence is relevant. This is where a good
computer forensic examiner can help. The examiner can help explain the technical
information in everyday language and help show how the evidence is relevant to the
case. The party that wants to introduce digital evidence must show how it is relevant.
Evidence is admissible if it is authentic. 35 This means that the party introducing
the evidence must show that the evidence is what it says it is. For example, suppose
a party wishes to produce a printout of an electronic document and use it to prove an
element in the case. Before being able to use the document, the party must show
that the document was stored in a computer system. The party also must show that
the document has not been altered, manipulated, or damaged since it was created.
Reliability is closely related to authenticity. It is often questioned in digital
evidence issues. The reliability of digital evidence can be suspect if the program
used to find the evidence has significant flaws. If the output of a program can change
because of these flaws, then it is not reliable. If it is not reliable, then the information
that the output represents may not be authentic.
Sometimes reliability is implicated at the forensic examination level. If a computer
forensic examiner uses a new tool or program to conduct a forensic examination, the
reliability of that tool must be demonstrated. The Daubert test is used to satisfy the
court that new forensic tools are reliable. If the tool is reliable, then the court is more
likely to admit the digital evidence.
As technology evolves, so too do the questions regarding the use of digital
evidence in court. For legal practitioners, the Sedona Principles for Addressing
Electronic Document Production is the best-known resource for how to properly use
electronic evidence in legal proceedings. 36 The 14 Sedona Principles are best
practices for how to use digital evidence in legal proceedings.
The Hearsay Rule
There are other rules that may apply when courts consider the admissibility of digital
evidence. For example, the hearsay rule 37 is often implicated with respect to
computer records and digital evidence. The hearsay rule is a very complicated
evidentiary rule with numerous exceptions. Sometimes even the most experienced
attorneys can be confused by the hearsay rule and its many exceptions.
Hearsay is any out-of-court statement that is made by a person that is offered to
prove some issue in a case. Hearsay statements are statements made by people.
They are not usually made under oath. Hearsay statements are sometimes offered
by parties at trial when there are no direct witnesses available to testify. Gossip is a
common example of hearsay. Statements that a news reporter makes when he or
she reports on events from an anonymous source are also hearsay. Hearsay is not
admissible unless a specific exception applies.
Records recovered from a computer can be hearsay, depending on how they
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.were created originally. Many courts have held that computer-generated records, the
logs and output of computer programs, are not hearsay. These records are created
without human intervention. Some courts have said that computer-generated
information is not a statement of a person and cannot be hearsay. 38 If the records
are not hearsay, then they are admissible.
Computer records that might be hearsay contain assertions by people. These
types of records include documents and files, bookkeeping records, and records of
transactions that are entered by people (and not through an electronic process). For
these types of documents, a party must show that the document is admissible
because of a hearsay exception. The party also must show that the document is
authentic.
Some courts allow computer records to be admitted over a hearsay objection if
they are created in the ordinary course of business. Records created in the ordinary
course of business are often admissible, even if the hearsay objection would
otherwise apply. 39 The theory is that records created as part of a business process
tend to be reliable. This is because the records are created repeatedly.
Trial Court Objections
Trial attorneys often make hearsay objections. That is, they object when opposing attorneys pose questions
meant to elicit hearsay from witnesses. An objection is a formal protest made to a judge. An attorney usually
makes an objection if the opposing party is asking questions that are inappropriate or violate a court rule.
If the judge agrees with the attorney who made the objection, the court will sustain the objection. This means
that the objection is correct. In this case, the attorney who originally asked a question must not ask it or must
rephrase it. If the judge does not agree with the attorney who made the objection, the court will overrule it.
This means that the original objection was not correct. When a judge overrules an objection, he or she is
allowing the original line of questioning to continue.
The Best Evidence Rule
The FRE require that original documents be used at trial to make sure that evidence
is reliable and authentic. 40 This is called the best evidence rule. This rule can create
an interesting problem for digital evidence. In its original form, digital evidence is
almost never in a format that a person can read and understand. The original form of
digital evidence would be particularly unhelpful at a trial, as it would not be usable.
However, any printout that represents digital evidence would not meet the best
evidence rule.
The FRE have made an exception for this quirk of digital evidence since 1972.
The rule states that an accurate printout of computerized data is an “original” for
purposes of the best evidence rule. 41 The FRE acknowledge that it is practical to
address computerized evidence in this way. 42 Any other result would not make
sense.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.CHAPTER SUMMARY
Computer forensics is the scientific process of collecting and examining data
stored on electronic devices to find evidence about an event or crime.
Evidence found on electronic devices is called digital evidence. Similar to
traditional forms of evidence, digital evidence is subject to rules that govern
how it can be used later. If digital evidence is not properly collected, it cannot
be used in court.
Computer forensic examiners collect digital evidence using special programs
and tools. They must collect the evidence carefully to make sure that it is not
changed. Examiners often have special skills. They must have a thorough
knowledge of computing technologies. They also must understand the
scientific method. Finally, examiners must be familiar with the law and
evidence rules.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Chain of custody
Code analysis
Computer forensics
Digital evidence
Forensic duplicate image
Fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine
Hearsay
Locard’s exchange principle
Media analysis
Network analysis
Network banner
Objection
Pen register devices
Persistent data
Probative evidence
Trap and trace devices
Volatile data
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.CHAPTER 15 ASSESSMENT
1. A system backup copy is considered a forensic duplicate image.
A. True
B. False
2. What is an exception to the Fourth Amendment’s search warrant requirement?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Consent
Plain view doctrine
Inventory search
All of these are correct.
None of these is correct.
3. Which principle is a basic assumption of forensic science?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The silver platter doctrine
Exigent circumstances
Locard’s exchange principle
The Daubert test
None of these is correct.
4. What are the three main electronic communications eavesdropping laws?
5. What is another common term for computer forensics?
6. Which type of computer forensics focuses on examining programming code?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Media analysis
Malware forensics
Internet forensics
Network analysis
None of these is correct.
7. Which forensic certification is only available to law enforcement personnel?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
CCE
GCFA
CCFE
EnCE
None of these is correct.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.8. A computer can play one of ________ roles in a crime.
9. Which investigative step includes “bag and tag”?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Identification
Preservation
Collection
Examination
None of these is correct.
10. Which investigative step includes interviewing persons of interest for information
about electronic devices?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Identification
Preservation
Collection
Presentation
None of these is correct.
11. Which organization created the most well-known guiding principles for computer
forensic examiners?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
IOCE
ISO/IEC
ISFCE
IACRB
None of these is correct.
12. What is volatile data?
13. Which law governs the collection of real-time transmission data?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act
The Wiretap Act
The Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute
The Fourth Amendment
None of these is correct.
14. A trap and trace device monitors incoming transmission data.
A. True
B. False
15. A forensic duplicate image is a ________.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.ENDNOTES
1. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Forensic Science
Technicians,” Occupational Outlook Handbook. Available at
https://www.bls.gov/ooh/life-physical-and-social-science/forensic-science-
technicians.htm (accessed March 15, 2020).
2. Easttom, C., System Forensics, Investigation, and Response. 2nd ed.
Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2013, p. 3.
3. Kaspersky, “Kaspersky Security Bulletin 2019: Statistics,” December 2019.
Available at https://securelist.com/kaspersky-security-bulletin-2019-
statistics/95475/ (accessed March 15, 2020).
4. Verizon, “2019 Data Breach Investigations Report,” May 2019. Available at
https://enterprise.verizon.com/resources/reports/2019-data-breach-
investigations-report.pdf (accessed March 15, 2020).
5. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “A Brief History of the FBI,” undated. Available
at https://www.fbi.gov/history/brief-history (accessed March 15, 2020).
6. International Association of Computer Investigative Specialists, “About IACIS,”
undated. Available at https://www.iacis.com/about/ (accessed March 15, 2020);
Mark Pollitt, “A History of Digital Forensics,” 6th IFIP WG 11.9 International
Conference on Digital Forensics, January 2010. Available at
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-01060606 (accessed March 15, 2020).
7. Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence, “About Us,” undated. Available at
https://www.swgde.org/home (accessed March 15, 2020).
8. Illinois Compiled Statutes, Chapter 225, sec. 447, art. 5-10.
9. Michigan Compiled Laws, Chapter 338.822.
10. Oregon Revised Statutes, Chapter 703.401, 703.405, 703.407, 703.411.
11. Texas Occupations Code Annotated, sec. 1702.104.
12. North Carolina General Statutes, Chapter 74C, sec. 3(b)(17).
13. Virginia Code, title 9.1, sec. 140.
14. American Bar Association, Section of Science & Technology Law, “ABA Adopts
Resolution Against Private Investigator Licenses for Computer Forensics,”
September 25, 2008. Available at
http://cdfs.org/files/Positions/ABA%20Press%20release%20compforensics.pdf
(accessed March 15, 2020).
15. Fisher v. United States, 425 U.S. 391 (1976).
16. U.S. Supreme Court, Federal Rules of Evidence, Rules 701–706, undated.
Available at
https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/federal_rules_of_evidence_-
_dec_1_2019_0.pdf (accessed March 15, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.17. Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 509 U.S. 579 (1993).
18. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Digital Evidence: Standards and Principles,
Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) International
Organization on Digital Evidence (IOCE), IOCE International Principles,”
Forensic Science Communications, April 2000, Vol. 2, No. 2. Available at
https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/about-us/lab/forensic-science-
communications/fsc/april2000/swgde.htm (accessed March 15, 2020).
19. Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), Pub. L. No. 99-508,
100 Stat. 1848, codified at U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 2510 (2020).
20. Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), Pub. L. No. 99-508,
100 Stat. 1848, codified at U.S. Code Vol. 18, secs. 2510–2523 (2020).
21. Wiretap statutes, U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 2510; U.S. Code Vol. 47, sec. 605
(2020).
22. Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute, U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 3121 et seq.
(2020).
23. United States v. Heckenkamp, 482 F.3d 1142, 1146 (9th Cir. 2007).
24. United States v. Al-Marri, 230 F. Supp.2d 535, 541 (S.D.N.Y. 2002).
25. Riley v. California, 573 U.S. 373 (2014).
26. Carpenter v. United States, 138 S. Ct. 2206 (2018).
27. Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 (PATRIOT Act), Pub. L. No. 107-
56, 115 Stat. 272 (Oct. 26, 2001), codified at various sections of the U.S. Code
(2020).
28. U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 2702(b) (2020).
29. United States v. Mullins, 992 F.2d 1472 (9th Cir. 1993).
30. U.S. Code Vol. 18, sec. 2511(2)(i) (2020).
31. Matt. 7:17-20, The Holy Bible, King James Version. Cambridge Edition: 1769;
King James Bible Online, 2014. Available at
http://www.kingjamesbibleonline.org/ (accessed March 15, 2020).
32. Silverthorne Lumber Co. v. United States, 251 U.S. 385 (1920).
33. Nardone v. United States, 308 U.S. 338 (1939).
34. Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 401.
35. Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 901.
36. The Sedona Conference, “The Sedona Principles, Third Edition: Best Practices,
Recommendations & Principles for Addressing Electronic Document
Production,” 19 SEDONA CONF. J. 1 (2018).
37. Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 801.
38. See United States v. Washington, 498 F.3d 225, 230-31 (4th Cir. 2007) (holding
that printed results from a computerized test were not the statement of a person
and are not excluded as hearsay); United States v. Hamilton, 413 F.3d 1138,
1142-43 (10th Cir. 2005) (holding that computer-generated header information is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.39.
40.
41.
42.
not hearsay).
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 803(6).
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 1002.
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 1001(3).
Federal Rules of Evidence, Rule 1001(3), Advisory Committee Notes (1972).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:15:35.
