© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
CHAPTER
5
Security and Privacy of Information
Belonging to Children and in
Educational Records
EVERAL LAWS ARE in place in the United States to protect children when they
are online. The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) governs how
information from children is to be collected and used. If you host a website that
collects information from children, COPPA applies to you. The Children’s Internet
Protection Act (CIPA) protects minors from obscene or objectionable material on
school or library computers. These computers must implement technology to filter
objectionable content. The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA)
protects the privacy rights of students and their educational records. Students and
parents have the right to review these records. Additionally, schools cannot release
records without the written consent of a student or parent.
S
This chapter begins with a discussion of children and the internet, and the unique
challenges website operators face in protecting children. The chapter then provides
details about COPPA, CIPA, and FERPA.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Chapter 5 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
What challenges exist in protecting children on the internet
What the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) is
What the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) is
What the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) is
Chapter 5 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
List some of the challenges with protecting children on the internet
Identify the purpose and scope of COPPA, and describe its main
requirements and oversight responsibilities
Identify the purpose and scope of CIPA, and describe its main
requirements and oversight responsibilities
Identify the purpose and scope of FERPA, and describe its main
requirements and oversight responsibilities
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Challenges in Protecting Children on the
Internet
U.S. children ages 8 to 18 spend over 7 hours a day using electronic media. This
includes television, music, computer use, and video game use. 1 This also means
that children may be exposed to age-inappropriate content, online marketing, online
harassment and bullying, and inappropriate data collection activities. Parents,
schools, and website providers all have different roles to play in protecting children
when they are online. It is not unusual to hear about cases where website operators
run afoul of the laws that attempt to protect children:
In 2019, a social media company paid $170 million to settle charges with the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and New York attorney general. The FTC
alleged that the company violated the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA). The company collected persistent identifiers known as cookies from
children before getting parental permission. The penalty was the largest ever
imposed in a COPPA case. 2
In 2018, the FTC alleged that a company that provided internet-connected toys
violated COPPA. It was the first time the FTC took action in a case involving
privacy and internet-connected toys. The FTC said that the toy company collected
the personal information of hundreds of thousands of children through a mobile
application without notifying parents or obtaining their consent. The company also
failed to use reasonable and appropriate data security measures to protect
personal information it collected. Both activities violated COPPA.
A student sued a local school board alleging that the school had violated the
student’s First Amendment rights. The lawsuit alleged that the school’s internet
filtering software blocked too much legitimate content. In this case, computers in
the school library blocked access to websites that promoted gay rights, but
allowed access to websites that opposed gay rights. The student did not challenge
that federal law required the school to use filtering software to block obscene
material. In 2012, a federal court judge found that the school’s blocking software
configuration was unconstitutional. It ordered the school to reconfigure its software
to make sure that it did not discriminate against different viewpoints. 3
Although most people agree that children should be protected when they are online,
they do not always agree on how that should be accomplished. For example, some
people suggest that a parent should monitor a child’s internet access and decide if
the child’s internet activities are acceptable. Others suggest that laws should be in
place to protect the child even if a parent is not monitoring the child’s internet use.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.As you will see in this chapter, several laws have been enacted to protect children.
Most of these laws are directed at the website operators who provide online content
to children.
However, even when enacting laws, challenges still exist. These include:
Identification of children—How can website operators distinguish between
adults and children online?
First Amendment and censorship—When does censoring certain types of
content violate the First Amendment?
Defining objectionable content—Where is the dividing line between material
that is merely inappropriate for children and that which is truly objectionable?
Identification of Children
In 1993, the New Yorker published the now-famous cartoon by Peter Steiner with the
caption, “On the Internet, nobody knows you’re a dog.” It is just as hard to separate
children from adults on the internet. To protect children, you must be able to identify
them. Although you can require identification from restaurant customers to ensure
they are old enough to purchase alcohol, it is not easy to require identification when
users access a website. Most users can easily remain anonymous when they are
online. This creates a problem for website operators. Most of the laws that aim to
protect children while they are online require website operators to be able to
distinguish children from adults.
NOTE
The Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB) is a self-regulating nonprofit that assigns independent
ratings to computer and video game content in the United States. This includes games available online.
The ratings help parents select appropriate games and other content for their children. Website operators
can voluntarily rate their websites according to ESRB so that parental controls work properly. Visit
http://www.esrb.org to learn more.
Website operators can use several methods to distinguish children from adults.
These include:
Requiring user input—A website can require users to identify if they are children
or adults. For example, users can select a check box indicating they are over a
certain age. They can be required to enter an age or a birth date. This is not a
foolproof method, however, because people can simply lie about their age. If a
child accesses an age-restricted website under false pretenses, the website
operator can still be liable for providing objectionable content to a child.
Requiring payment—If a website has material that should be restricted from
children, it can require a payment to access the site. Payment can be made using
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.a credit card, a PayPal account, or another method that a child is unlikely to be
able to use. The payment may be a nominal fee, such as 99 cents. It could also be
a larger fee designed to generate revenue. A payment requirement can be
effective because children generally do not have access to means of payment.
Using parental controls—Some operating systems include parental controls. So
do many applications. Parental controls allow a parent to restrict their children’s
access to objectionable material based on different ratings.
Requiring parental consent—If a child wishes to access a particular website,
that site can block the child’s access until a parent provides permission. This
means that the website operator implements controls to verify that a parent is
providing consent to access the website.
First Amendment and Censorship
The First Amendment, which is a part of the Bill of Rights, grants certain rights
related to freedom of speech. It also protects freedom of the press and the free
exercise of religion. First Amendment issues come into play on the internet in many
different ways:
Individuals online have a First Amendment right to view lawful content, including
content that others might find troubling.
Website operators and other content creators have a First Amendment right to
post lawful content, including content that others might find troubling.
The U.S. Supreme Court has said that the right to freedom of speech applies to the
internet. 4 This means that the government cannot restrict an adult’s access to
content on the internet. However, the government can restrict a child’s access to
harmful online materials if the government has a compelling reason to do so.
When the government restricts a child’s access to objectionable online materials,
other issues are raised. Does it violate a website operator’s rights to force it to
censor material because a child might view it? If individuals are required to identify
themselves before they can use a website, such as proving that they are not
children, does that restrict their free speech? Does it restrict free speech if
individuals are required to identify themselves by name in comments on a website?
If libraries are required to use filters on computers to keep children from viewing
objectionable content, does it restrict the free speech rights of adults who also use
those same computers?
Many of these issues continue to evolve within the context of the laws discussed
in this chapter.
Defining Obscenity
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.The laws discussed in this chapter protect the privacy of children. They also protect
children from harmful content. For the most part, this harmful content is content that
would be considered obscene. Most people agree that children should not see
obscene material. However, it is difficult to legally define what obscene material is.
I Know It When I See It
A 1964 U.S. Supreme Court case shows the difficulty of defining obscenity. 5 In Jacobellis v. Ohio, a movie
theater manager was convicted under state law of illegally possessing and exhibiting an obscene film. The
state supreme court upheld the conviction. However, the U.S. Supreme Court later reversed that decision.
In this case, the Court agreed that the First Amendment does not protect pornography or obscenity. It
disagreed about whether the motion picture was obscene. In the Court’s decision, Justice Potter Stewart
expressed the difficulty of defining what is obscenity and pornography. He wrote, “But I know it when I see it,
and the motion picture involved with this case is not that.”
This case was decided over 50 years ago. Yet the challenge of identifying obscenity still exists today.
The U.S. Supreme Court addressed this in 1973. In Miller v. California the Court
said that for material to be identified as “obscene,” it must meet three conditions. The
conditions are based on the average person applying contemporary community
standards to a review of the material. The three conditions are that the material:
Appeals predominantly to prurient interests—prurient indicates a morbid,
degrading, and unhealthy interest in sex
Depicts or describes sexual conduct in a patently offensive way
Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value 6
It is not always easy to apply this definition. What one person considers obscene,
another person may consider healthy. Material that one person finds informative may
be deemed tasteless by another. Material that is offensive to one person may be
viewed as valuable by another. How a person views material is often influenced by
societal, family, community, and religious values.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
The COPPA 7 passed in November 1998 and first went into effect in April 2000.
COPPA governs how websites collect information from children under the age of 13.
The FTC oversees COPPA compliance and has the power to make rules for COPPA
compliance. The FTC rule governing COPPA, called the COPPA Rule, was first
drafted in 1999 and most recently revised in 2013. In 2019 the FTC began the
process of revising the COPPA Rule because of the fast pace of technology change.
However, it may take years before an updated rule is finalized and released.
NOTE
The three conditions for defining obscenity are known as the Miller test.
Websites must follow specific rules under COPPA to collect and use information
from children. There are several important definitions in the COPPA Rule:
Child—Any person under the age of 13
Parent—The legal guardian of a child
Operator—A website operator, or operator of an online service, who collects or
maintains personal information about users
Purpose of COPPA
The primary purpose of COPPA is to protect children’s privacy on the internet, as
well as protect them from age-inappropriate content and online marketing. Websites
must follow specific rules if they collect or use a child’s personal information. For
example, they must obtain a parent’s consent before doing so. They must also post
a privacy policy explaining their practices.
Personal information includes:
A child’s first and last name
A child’s email address or other online contact information such as an Instant
Messaging username or voice over Internet Protocol (VOIP) identifier
A child’s screen name or username
A child’s physical address, such as his or her home address
A child’s telephone number
A child’s Social Security number (SSN)
Photographs, video, or audio files that contain a child’s image or voice
Geolocation data that identifies a physical address
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Any persistent identifier, such as an internet cookie or Internet Protocol (IP)
address, that is used to recognize a user over time and across different websites
Any other information concerning a child or the child’s parents that a website
operator collects from a child and combines with any other data about a child 8
Any personal information that is collected must be protected. This means that the
website operator must protect the confidentiality, security, and integrity of this data.
Website operators must ensure the information is not made publicly available to
others. This includes making sure it is not displayed on a home page of a website,
on a message board, or in a chatroom. The law allows website operators to share
this kind of data only for specific reasons. However, when website operators share
this information, they must share it only with third parties who can properly protect it. 9
NOTE
COPPA is not the same as the Child Online Protection Act (COPA). COPA was enacted in 1998 to protect
minors from access to harmful material on the internet. However, courts ruled that COPA violated free
speech and the law never went into effect. The Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) is similar to what
COPA attempted to accomplish and is discussed later in this chapter.
Scope of the Regulation
COPPA applies to anyone operating online services that collect or use information
about children under the age of 13. This includes situations where the website
operator directly collects the information, as well as situations where the website
operator lets third parties collect the information. Even general-audience websites
might have to follow the COPPA Rule. If operators of general-audience sites know
they are collecting data from children, then they must comply with COPPA. For
example, an operator might know that its site is collecting data from children if it asks
users to share their birth date. An operator that collects demographic data such as
school attendance and grade completion might also know that children are using its
website. Website operators are also required to protect the security of any
information that they do properly collect from children.
The definition of website or online service is broad. In addition to websites, it also
includes:
Mobile apps
Internet gaming platforms
Advertising networks
Connected toys and other internet-connected devices
Internet-enabled location services 10
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Main Requirements
COPPA has two main rules that websites must follow in order to comply with the
rule. Operators must:
Post a privacy policy
Get verifiable parental consent before collecting information from children
Privacy Policy
Under COPPA, websites must post a privacy policy. 11 The privacy policy states the
kind of information the site collects about children. It also states how the site will use
the information. The COPPA Rule tells operators the terms that must be included in
the privacy policy.
COPPA requires that a website privacy policy should be easily visible and
accessible. The rule requires that a link to the privacy policy should be included on
the home page of the website. The rule also requires that the link should be posted
on every area of the website where a child’s personal information is collected. 12 A
COPPA-compliant privacy policy must be accessible from a clear and prominent link.
This means the link needs to stand out and be noticeable to users of the website. A
website designer can achieve this in a variety of ways. For example, the designer
can use different type sizes, fonts, colors, or contrasting backgrounds to highlight the
link. In addition, the privacy policy must be clearly labeled to indicate it is a privacy
policy. The most common label is “Privacy Policy.” Other examples of clear labels
are “Privacy Statement” and “Information Practices Statement.”
NOTE
COPPA does not specifically use the phrase “privacy policy.” It requires website operators to provide a
notice on their websites that identifies the collected information. However, the FTC’s COPPA Rule calls this
notice a “privacy policy.”
Privacy Policy Content
The privacy policy needs to contain specific information to be COPPA-compliant. For
example, it must be clearly written and easy to read. The format is not as important
as the content. At a minimum, the policy must contain:
Operator contact information—This includes the name, mailing address,
telephone number, and email address of all operators collecting or using the
information collected on the website. If several operators are collecting
information, the policy can list the contact details for only one operator under two
conditions. First, the names of all operators must be listed in the privacy policy or
in a link accessible from that policy. Second, the listed operator must respond to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.all questions about the policy. It also must answer questions about how data is
collected and used on the site.
Notice of what information is collected—The policy must be specific. A generic
term such as “contact information” is not acceptable. Instead, the policy should
specify the child’s name, address, telephone number, gender, age, and email
address.
Notice of how information is collected—A website can collect information
actively or passively. A user entering information into a form is active collection. In
contrast, a web cookie that collects personal information is passive collection. The
privacy policy must clearly state how information is collected.
Notice of how the information will be used—Websites must state how the
information will be used. It must be specific. For example, a website could collect
email addresses for newsletter subscriptions. It could collect mailing addresses for
prizes. It could also collect the information for sales and marketing purposes. Each
use must be clearly stated.
Notice of whether the information is disclosed to third parties—The website
must also state whether collected information is shared with a third party. These
are any entities that are not the operator of the website. Third parties also include
entities that do not provide internal support for the website. Parents may refuse to
share the collected data with third parties.
Assurance that participation is not conditioned on data collection—That is, a
website cannot require children to submit contact details in order to be allowed to
use the site. Websites are not allowed to collect more information than necessary
for a child to participate in an activity. This prevents the website from collecting too
much information about a child. For example, a website may collect an email
address for an online newsletter subscription. Collecting a physical mailing
address for an online newsletter is not reasonable. The privacy policy should
clearly state that a website will not condition participation on information collection.
Parental rights—The policy must state that a parent can review information
collected on his or her child. Parents can also tell the website to delete any data it
has collected, as well as refuse further data collection. They can also refuse to
allow the website to share collected information with third parties.
Gaining Parental Consent
COPPA has specific rules about getting parental consent. This consent is required if
a website wants to use and collect data from a child. Website operators must take
reasonable steps to make sure that a parent receives direct notice of the operator’s
data collection practices. This notice must include:
That the operator has collected the parent’s online contact information from the
child in order to obtain parental consent
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.That the parent’s consent is required to collect, use, or disclose the child’s
information. The notice must state that the operator will not collect, use, or
disclose the child’s information without parental consent
The specific items of data that the website operator wants to collect from the child
A link to the website privacy policy
How the parent can give verifiable consent to the collection, use, and disclosure of
the child’s information
That if the parent does not provide consent within a reasonable time, the operator
will delete the parent’s online contact information from its records 13
Under COPPA, parental consent must be verifiable. Only a parent can give consent.
A website operator must verify the identity of the parents that it contacts. This
becomes especially important if the parent requests to see the information held
about his or her child. Website operators must have measures in place to prevent
the information from being released to the wrong party. 14
Parents have other rights under the COPPA Rule. The website must re-notify
parents whenever it changes its data collection and use procedures. Parents must
be allowed to review information collected from their children. They also must be
allowed to revoke their consent. If a parent revokes his or her consent, website
operators must stop collecting, using, or disclosing that data immediately. Parents
also can request that a website operator delete data held on their children. Website
operators must make parents aware of how to exercise these additional rights.
NOTE
There are many websites directed toward children. Next time you visit one of them, see if you can find the
website’s privacy policy. Is it easy to find? Does it contain the terms discussed in this section?
Consent is not required at all in some instances. Websites do not need parental
consent if they are collecting an email address to respond to a one-time request from
a child. Nor do they need consent to provide the initial notice to the parent. Consent
is also not required to collect a child’s name and online contact information to protect
the security of the website.
In some instances, upfront consent is not required. In these special
circumstances, the website must still later tell parents that it collected data. For
example, a website can collect a child’s name, parent’s name, and online contact
information in order to protect a child’s safety. If a website collects this information, it
must later tell parents that it collected the information and it must not use this
information for any other purpose. 15
Verifying Parental Consent
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.A website operator can use one of several methods to verify a person is a parent of a child and get consent
for data collection. These include:
Sending signed printed forms—These may be sent via mail, fax, or email. An electronic scan of a
signed consent form is permissible.
Provide government-issued identification—Parents can provide copies of government-issued ID that
can then be checked against a database. In this situation, website operators must delete the
identification record once the verification process is completed.
Using credit cards or other online payment forms—The credit card or online payment mechanism
can verify details about the parent.
Using toll-free numbers—Parents can call and provide details to verify their identities.
Using video conference—Parents can connect via video conference to trained personnel in order to
provide details to verify their identities.
Answering knowledge-based questions—Parents can answer a series of challenge questions that
would be difficult for a child to answer.
Some operators suggest that these methods are too costly to be practical. Therefore, many websites try to
avoid the law. They do not collect information on children, and their privacy statement reflects this. Users are
required to indicate they are at least 13 years old before information is collected. They might do this by
entering their age on a website form or checking a box indicating they are at least 13 years old. However, it is
possible for children to easily overcome these types of controls.
Oversight
The FTC provides oversight for COPPA. The FTC investigates complaints of
websites that violate COPPA. It can also bring enforcement actions and impose civil
penalties for COPPA violations. The FTC provides many tools to help website
operators comply with the law.
NOTE
The FTC summarizes the COPPA Rule at http://www.business.ftc.gov/privacy-and-security/childrens-
privacy.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Children’s Internet Protection Act
The CIPA, 16 which was passed in 2000, requires schools and libraries that receive
funding from the U.S. government for internet access to filter offensive and sexually
explicit online content. The goal of the program is to limit children’s access to
offensive and age-inappropriate content on the internet. Under CIPA, a minor is
anyone under the age of 17. 17 These schools and libraries had until July 1, 2004, to
first comply with CIPA.
NOTE
Note the differences in ages between CIPA and COPPA. COPPA defines a child as anyone under the age
of 13. CIPA defines a minor as anyone under the age of 17.
CIPA was quickly challenged. The American Library Association and the
American Civil Liberties Union sued the U.S. government, claiming CIPA violated the
free speech rights of adults. They also claimed the law was so broad that it could
prevent minors from getting information about topics such as breast cancer. In 2002,
the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania agreed that CIPA
violated First Amendment rights and that the government could not enforce CIPA.
The U.S. government appealed that decision. 18
NOTE
A visual depiction is any picture, image, or graphic image.
The suit went to the U.S. Supreme Court. In United States et al. v. American
Library Association, Inc. et al. in 2003, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned the
District Court ruling and upheld the law. The Supreme Court said that the law was
constitutional because it was conditional. That is, only schools and libraries that
chose to receive federal funding to subsidize their internet access costs were
required to follow the law. If it wanted to, a school or library could choose not to
accept the funding. If that happened, then it did not have to comply with CIPA.
Purpose
The primary purpose of CIPA is to protect minors from accessing offensive content
on the internet. Offensive content includes visual depictions of material that is any of
the following:
Obscene
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Child pornography
Harmful to minors
Under CIPA, obscene and child pornography are defined by referring to other laws.
CIPA does specifically define the phrase harmful to minors. It includes any visual
content that:
Taken as a whole and with respect to minors, appeals to a prurient interest in
nudity, sex, or excretion
FYI
E-Rate funding provides discounts to schools and libraries for internet access and telecommunications
services. This funding is collected as part of the universal services fee paid by consumers to use
telecommunications services. The goal of this funding is to help all schools and libraries have
affordable internet access. Discounts range from 20 to 90 percent of the service costs depending on
the need of the school or library. Part of the E-Rate application requires schools and libraries to state
affirmatively that they are complying with CIPA. The E-Rate program provided $4.15 billion in funding in
2019. Learn more at https://www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/universal-service-program-schools-and-
libraries-e-rate.
Depicts, describes, or represents, in a patently offensive way with respect to what
is suitable for minors, an actual or simulated sexual act or sexual contact, actual or
simulated normal or perverted sexual acts, or a lewd exhibition of the genitals
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value as to
minors 19
Scope of the Regulation
The E-Rate program provides discounts to most schools and libraries for internet
access. Any school or library that receives federal funding from the E-Rate program
must comply with CIPA. However, schools and libraries do not have to accept these
funds. They can either pay for the internet access with other funds, or choose not to
use the internet.
Main Requirements
CIPA has two main requirements. The first is that schools and libraries that accept E-
Rate funding must implement technologies that filter offensive visual content so that
minors do not access it. The second requirement is that schools implement an
internet safety policy.
Content Filtering
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.The primary requirements of CIPA mandate the filtering of offensive content so that
minors do not see it. Although this may seem difficult, there are tools to make the job
easier. CIPA’s term for such a tool is technology protection measure (TPM). A
TPM is any technology that can block or filter the objectionable content. 20 Remember
that under CIPA, a TPM must filter visual content.
Consider FIGURE 5-1. This figure shows a proxy server used to filter content. A
proxy server accepts internet requests from clients, retrieves the pages, and serves
them to the client. Content filters filter out objectionable content. As shown, you
would configure the internal clients to access the internet through a proxy server.
FIGURE 5-1
Proxy server used for content filtering.
Description
The proxy server has a content filter that blocks all content marked as
unacceptable. Some filters can also block content to email and instant messaging
programs. Similarly, the filter allows all content marked as acceptable based on filter
lists.
Third-party companies sell subscriptions to filter lists. These companies
constantly search the internet, identify restricted materials, and add it to the filter
lists. When a network administrator adds the filter to an organization’s proxy server,
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.the server blocks the prohibited material.
In addition to filtering with lists such as the previously described ones, TPMs can
also include monitoring technologies that track a child’s online activities. They can
also limit the amount of time that a child can spend on the internet. In addition, TPMs
include age-verification systems that restrict online access to adults.
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) recognizes that a TPM cannot
be 100 percent effective. 21 However, neither CIPA nor the FCC defines what level is
acceptable. A third-party company may claim its filter is CIPA compliant. However,
there is no certification process to verify that a filter is CIPA compliant. The FCC has
stated that local authorities should determine which measures are most effective for
their community. The FCC rules specifically state that the U.S. federal government
may not establish the criteria for making this determination and that it must be
handled at the local level. 22
Although a proxy server is a common method of filtering, CIPA does not specify
where to filter the content. An internet service provider (ISP) may be able to filter it,
or you may be able to purchase software to install on individual computers for
filtering purposes. CIPA states what must be filtered but not how to filter it.
Proxy Servers in Any Company
Many companies use proxy servers. Their use is not restricted to CIPA compliance. Many companies choose
to restrict employees’ access to different internet websites. For example, a company may want to prevent
employees from accessing gambling sites. To do so, it can purchase a subscription to lists of gambling sites
from one of the third-party sites that provide filter lists. The company can then install this filter on its proxy
server.
When the user tries to access the prohibited site, the proxy server can instead show a different page. For
example, the server could redirect the user to a web page that states, “Access is restricted.” This page also
could show the company’s acceptable usage policy. Additionally, many proxy servers log all activities.
Administrators are able to view the logs to determine which employees are trying to access restricted sites.
Internet Safety Policy
To comply with CIPA, schools and libraries must adopt and enforce an internet safety
policy that must be made available to all users of the facility. The policy must
address the following items:
Access by minors to inappropriate matter on the internet
The safety and security of minors when using electronic mail, chatrooms, and
other forms of direct electronic communication
Unauthorized access, such as “hacking,” and other unlawful activities
Unauthorized disclosure, use, and dissemination of a minor’s personal information
The measures designed to restrict minors’ access to harmful materials
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.An internet safety policy must educate minors about appropriate online behavior.
This includes how to use social networking websites and chatrooms safely. The
policy must include information on how to recognize cyberbullying, as well as how
minors should respond to it. 23
Exceptions
One of the main criticisms of CIPA is that schools and libraries are not implementing
it properly. CIPA requires schools and libraries to filter visual depictions that may be
harmful to minors. This means that images must be censored. However, sometimes
access to text and entire websites are inadvertently blocked. In addition, sometimes
the TPMs used by libraries may not work correctly and may actually allow minors
access to obscene materials. Finally, often TPMs deny access by both adults and
children to constitutionally protected content.
According to CIPA, a school or library must be able to disable the TPM for any
adult who has a need to view content for a research or other lawful purpose. An
adult is anyone over the age of 17. If a school or library refuses to disable a TPM for
an adult that requests it, then the school or library is potentially infringing on the First
Amendment rights of that adult. This is because they are censoring adult access to
protected content. Under CIPA, an adult does not have to state why he or she wants
the TPM disabled.
The United States et al. v. American Library Association, Inc. et al. Supreme
Court ruling in 2003 explicitly mentioned this point. One of the reasons that the
Supreme Court held that the law was constitutional is because a TPM could be
disabled for any adult that requests it.
Libraries can use any method to disable the TPM that works best for their
location. For example, library personnel could label some computers as “adult only.”
Librarians would then have to monitor and prevent minors from using these
computers. Librarians also could log onto a program designed to disable the TPM.
Only personnel with the proper credentials could disable the TPM. Another method
is to require an administrator to disable the TPM. Upon request by a patron, the
librarian could contact an administrator to disable the TPM.
Oversight
The FCC has oversight for CIPA. However, little oversight action is required. When a
public school or library requests E-Rate funding, it must certify that they will comply
with CIPA. This certification is usually all that is required.
If a TPM fails, the school or library is expected to take steps to resolve the failure.
Patrons may complain to the library for specific instances such as a TPM blocking
too much content or not enough content. If the library does not resolve patron
complaints, then the patron can file a complaint with the FCC, which may investigate
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.those complaints. Any school or library that fails to comply with CIPA must refund
any E-Rate funds or discounts that it received. Depending on the situation, other
criminal laws such as laws against providing false statements to the government
could apply to CIPA violations.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA)
FERPA was passed in 1974. 24 The primary goal of FERPA is to protect the privacy of
student educational records. An educational record includes any personal and
education data on a student maintained by an educational agency or institution.
Under FERPA, parents have the right to inspect and review a student’s educational
records. However, these rights do not belong to a parent forever. When the student
reaches age 18, these rights pass to the student.
Scope
FERPA applies to any education agencies or institutions that receive funding from
the U.S. Department of Education (ED). Educational agencies or institutions include:
Primary and secondary schools
Vocational colleges
Colleges and universities
Community colleges
State and local educational agencies
Schools or agencies offering preschool programs
For readability, the phrase “educational agency or institution” will often be shortened
to “school” in this section.
The type of funding that these institutions receive from the federal government
can be direct or indirect. Schools may receive funding outright from the ED. This is
direct funding. If a college student receives a federal grant or federal aid and uses
this as payment to a university, then the university is receiving federal funding. This
is indirect funding and the university must comply with FERPA. Because federal
funding is so valuable, and comes from so many different sources, almost all schools
comply with FERPA.
FERPA and Peer-Grading
Many professors use peer-grading techniques. Students may be required to work on a project together and
grade each other at the completion of the project. Additionally, students may be required to exchange
assignments or tests and grade each other. Some professors require students to call out other students’
grades in class. This is acceptable under FERPA.
Under FERPA, a school cannot publish students’ grades, not even on a bulletin board outside of a classroom.
This prohibition does not extend to peer grading. The U.S. Supreme Court decided this in 2002. In Owasso
Independent School District No. I-011 v. Falvo, the court decided that peer grades are not maintained as
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.education records. Therefore, FERPA does not protect them from disclosure.
If any educational agency or institution chooses not to comply with FERPA, it
cannot receive any federal funds. Sometimes private schools and universities do not
receive federal funds. In these cases, these institutions do not have to comply with
FERPA.
NOTE
FERPA formally defines personally identifiable information (PII). Several other laws and regulations also
define PII. PII can be a name, a SSN, biometric data, or any data used to identify a person. Several laws
and regulations specify different types of PII that must be protected.
Main Requirements
FERPA has four main requirements: annual notification, access to education
records, amendment of education records, and disclosure of education records.
To carry out these requirements, FERPA has several important definitions. 25
These include:
Student—Any individual that has ever been in attendance at an educational
institution and for whom the institution maintains education records.
Attendance—A student’s physical attendance at an educational institution. It
includes any virtual attendance such as video conference or correspondence
course. Attendance via the internet, by satellite, or through other methods used by
the school is also included.
Education records—Any records related to a student maintained by an
educational agency or institution. These include written documents, computer
media, video, film, or photographs. Records maintained by any outside party
acting for the agency or institution are also included.
FERPA also defines PII and places limits on how this data can be used and
disclosed. Under FERPA, PII includes:
A student’s name
The name of the student’s parent or other family members
The address of the student or student’s family
A personal identifier, such as the student’s SSN, student number, or biometric
record
Other identifiers, such as the student’s date of birth, place of birth, and mother’s
maiden name
Other information that is connected to a specific student that would allow a
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.reasonable person in the school community to identify the student
Information requested by a person who the school reasonably believes knows the
identity of the student to whom the education record relates
It is important to know what might be included in a student’s education record. The
rules can be complex. Demographic information such as race and gender cannot be
given out if it is directly connected with a student name. FERPA protects grades or
transcripts of grades. Disciplinary records are considered a part of the student
educational record. Behavioral notes on the student are also protected if the notes
are kept in the student record. Under FERPA, the private notes of faculty and staff
are not usually considered educational records. If the faculty or staff notes are kept
in a student record then they are considered part of the educational record.
It is possible for a student record to contain additional information outside the
scope of FERPA. FERPA does not require schools to reveal this data when access
to an educational record is requested. For example, a school does not have to reveal
parental financial records, confidential letters of recommendation, or statements of
recommendation.
Annual Notification
FERPA requires schools to provide an annual notification to students and parents.
This notice lets parents and eligible students know what their FERPA rights are. The
annual notification also must state how to file a complaint with the Department of
Education if the school violates any of FERPA’s provisions. 26
The annual notification must identify school officials that have access to
educational records without consent. FERPA allows any school official that has
legitimate educational interest in the record to view it without specific consent. These
officials must be identified in the annual notification. The school has great freedom in
identifying these officials. They could be teachers, instructors, professors,
administrative personnel such as principals or provosts, or local board of education
personnel.
Finally, FERPA requires that the school provide the annual notice “by any means
that are reasonably likely to inform the parents or eligible students of their rights.” 27
This means that the school might have to translate the notice into different
languages. It also must consider whether it should provide the notice in alternative
formats to disabled students or parents.
Access to Education Records
The most fundamental right under FERPA is student and parental access to the
student’s educational records. The parent or eligible student has the right to inspect
and review any educational records maintained by the school. 28 Under FERPA,
schools must respond within 45 days to a request to inspect and review educational
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.records.
In most instances, the school does not have to make copies of the records. It
only needs to make them available for review and inspection. If the parent or student
requests copies, the school may charge a small copying fee.
There are special access rules for colleges and universities. These rules apply to
situations where an educational record for the student may also contain confidential
information about the student’s parents. This happens often in situations where
parents provide their own financial information to help a student receive federal
financial aid. In these situations, colleges and universities do not have to give a
student access to the financial records of his or her parents. 29
NOTE
Eligible students are students over the age of 18 or those who are attending a postsecondary institution.
FERPA parental rights transfer to the student when the student becomes an eligible student.
FYI
Schools are required to make and provide copies of the educational records in special circumstances. If a
parent does not live within commuting distance to the school and cannot come to the school to inspect the
records, then the school must provide the parent with copies.
Finally, a school is not required to create an educational record where none
exists. Sometimes students or parents might request a report or record that is not
already part of the educational record. In these cases, the school does not have to
create that report just because a parent asked for it.
Amendment of Education Records
FERPA allows parents and students the right to request amendment of student
educational records. A parent may ask that a school amend information in the record
that is incorrect or misleading. The school’s annual notification must specify the
procedure for how to request this correction. 30
NOTE
Schools are required to hold hearings on amendment disputes within a reasonable time after it receives a
request for a hearing. The school must give the parent or eligible student notice of the time, date, and
location of the hearing.
Schools are not required to honor the request for correction if the school does not
believe that the student’s record is incorrect. The school must notify the parent or
student of this decision. If a school does not amend a student educational record,
then the parent or eligible student has the right to a hearing on that decision. 31 The
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.purpose of the hearing is to determine if the school’s decision was appropriate. The
school and the parents will present their cases to the hearing officer. If the hearing
officer decides that the school’s decision was appropriate, then the parent or eligible
student must be allowed an opportunity to provide a written statement that is added
to the student’s educational record. The written statement can comment on the
information under dispute in the record. It can also state why the parent or student
disagrees with the decision of the school not to amend the record.
Disclosure of Education Records
In general, educational agencies or institutions must have permission from either a
student or the student’s parents in order to disclose educational records and student
PII. The school must obtain written consent to release this data. Most schools have
forms for this purpose. The procedure for using these forms is usually included in the
school’s annual notification.
NOTE
It is important to remember that the parent has these rights until the student reaches the age of 18 or is
attending a postsecondary institution. After that point, the parent no longer has the rights. Only the child
has the rights. In other words, a parent may be paying for a 20-year-old son or daughter’s college
education, but the parent does not have the right to inspect his or her child’s educational records.
To disclose student educational records, written consent must include:
Which records will be disclosed
The purpose of the disclosure
Who will receive the record
The date the consent is granted
Signature of the student or parent
Signature of the school official releasing the data 32
Parents and students can refuse to give consent to have their data released.
However, the school can still release data to certain entities under FERPA
exceptions. The next section explains these exceptions.
Disclosure Exceptions Under FERPA
A school can release student records without prior consent in some cases. As
mentioned earlier in this section, school officials, such as principals or teachers, can
view student educational records. These officials must have a legitimate educational
interest to view the record. School officials cannot view a student record merely if
they are curious about a student’s performance.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Directory information can also be released without student or parental consent.
Directory information includes a student’s name, address, telephone number, date
and place of birth, awards, and dates of attendance. Under no circumstances should
the directory information include PII information such as a student’s SSN or student
identification number.
Schools must identify which student data is specifically defined as directory
information. Schools also must tell parents and eligible students how to request that
the school not share this information. All of this information must be included in the
school’s annual notice. 33 The release of directory information is the primary FERPA
disclosure exception. Schools frequently rely on this exception.
FERPA allows a school to disclose student PII in several other ways that do not
require prior written consent:
Schools can transfer a student’s educational record to a new school if a student is
moving from one school to another.
Schools can provide student PII to an accrediting organization to prove that the
school is performing to specific standards.
Schools can provide student PII in some financial aid situations.
Schools may disclose student educational records in response to a court order or
lawful subpoena.
School may disclose student PII if it will aid personnel in an emergency situation.
Postsecondary schools can disclose the PII of a student over age 18 to that
student’s parents if the student is considered a dependent for U.S. federal tax
purposes.
The emergency situation exception became important in early 2020 during the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak. During the outbreak, the
Department of Education reminded all schools that health records maintained by the
school could be disclosed, without consent, if the school believed that the COVID-19
virus posed a serious risk to the health or safety of an individual student at the
school. The emergency situation exception is limited in time to the period of the
emergency and generally does not allow for a blanket release of PII from student
education records. 34
Schools must maintain records of all of the requests and disclosures of student
educational records. 35 These records must include the parties who received the
student PII and the reason for the disclosure. This record of disclosures must be
maintained for as long as the school maintains the underlying educational record.
Security of Student Records Under FERPA
FERPA has no specific information security requirements that schools must use to
protect student educational records. For example, FERPA does not contain a
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.requirement that schools notify parents and students if an unauthorized person
accesses student records. Instead, schools just have to record the unauthorized
disclosure in the student record.
Even though it is not required under FERPA, the U.S. Department of Education
does encourage educational institutions to take steps to protect student information.
The department suggests that schools consider the following factors to implement
security measures:
The type of information to be protected
The size and complexity of the educational institution
The resources available to the institution
Security safeguards used by other institutions in similar circumstances 36
Although FERPA does not have specific information security requirements, the
Department of Education often uses other laws to encourage colleges and
universities, in particular, to protect student data. For example, the U.S. Department
of Education Office of Federal Student Aid (FSA) administers student financial aid
awards. Colleges and universities that administer federal student financial aid have
agreed to comply with the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) as part of their
agreement with FSA. This means that those colleges and universities must show
that all federal student aid applicant information is protected from unauthorized
access. 37
Oversight
The Family Policy Compliance Office (FPCO) in the U.S. Department of Education
provides oversight for FERPA and investigates FERPA complaints. Only parents and
students over the age of 18 may make complaints against schools for FERPA
violations. Complaints must be submitted to the FPCO within 180 days of the date
that the FERPA violation is alleged to have occurred. 38 The FPCO resolves FERPA
complaints and enforces its decisions by withholding federal funding to the schools
that have violated the law.
How to Respond to Requests
A school may receive many different kinds of requests for information. Any personnel that have access to
records should have training on how to respond. Put yourself in the situation of the person answering the
phone. How would you respond to these questions if you were an employee at a college or university?
An employer calls and asks about a student who graduated last year. Specifically, the employer asks if the
student graduated. Does FERPA restrict the release of this information? How do you respond?
FERPA covers this information. You may need to explain this to the employer.
You can give the information to the employer if the student signs a consent form.
A student needs a copy of his transcript. He asks a friend to pick it up for him. What should you tell the friend
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.when he shows up?
FERPA restricts the school from giving the friend this information.
You may check the student’s record to see if it has a signed consent form for this friend. If not, the
transcript should not be given out.
The student must sign a consent form.
A mother calls about her 17-year-old son. She wants to know if her son will be graduating with his class.
Does the parent have rights to this information? What do you tell her?
FERPA rights transferred to the son when he started attending classes at the university. The parent
does not have rights to this information. You may want to explain the FERPA requirements to the
mother.
Encourage the mother to talk with her son. In other words, ask her son if he will be graduating. You can
provide information on how someone can reenroll in classes.
The mayor recently made a speech and mentioned a student at your school. The mayor talked about how the
student had earned a specific degree and was now working on a higher-level degree. You know that the
student never completed any degree at your school. What should you do?
FERPA protects this information. You should not take any action.
If the mayor or the mayor’s office requests the information, you cannot release it without a consent
form.
State Laws Protecting Student Data
In addition to the protections afforded by FERPA, many states also have state laws
designed to protect student privacy. For example, 40 states passed 125 laws related
to student privacy from 2013 to 2018. 39 Many of these laws were put into place
because of the rise in online learning activities. States were worried that vendors
would have access to student information and would use or share student data
improperly. Often these laws try to extend FERPA protections and have even more
restrictions about what student data a school can share with others.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.Case Studies and Examples
The following case studies provide some real-world background on COPPA and
FERPA. These examples provide insight into how the laws are challenged and
viewed.
Children’s Privacy
Website operators have an obligation to follow COPPA if they know that they are
collecting information from children.
In 2019, the FTC charged operators of the Musical.ly video social networking app
with violating COPPA. Musical.ly is now known as TikTok. The FTC alleged that
Musical.ly knew many children were using the app. It also alleged that Musical.ly
failed to seek parental consent before collecting personal information from users
under the age of 13. Even though Musical.ly was a general use website, the FTC
said that Musical.ly had received thousands of complaints from parents upset that
their children under age 13 had created Musical.ly accounts. Because it had
received so many complaints, Musical.ly could not argue that it had no knowledge
that children were using the app.
As part of its settlement agreement with the FTC, Musical.ly agreed to pay $5.7
million to settle the FTC’s claims. Musical.ly also had to agree to comply with COPPA
by:
Notifying parents about the app’s collection and use of children’s personal
information
Getting parental consent before collecting and using data from children
Deleting personal information when parents request it
Removing all videos made by children under the age of 13
The FTC documents related to the Musical.ly case are available at
https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-proceedings/172-3004/musically-inc
Release of Disciplinary Records
Disciplinary records are a part of student records. Because FERPA protects student
records, it thereby protects disciplinary records. A student’s consent is required
before releasing any of these records.
A U.S. district court in the Southern District of Ohio decided this in 2000. The
U.S. Court of Appeals affirmed the decision in 2002. However, the case actually
started in 1995 and has a colorful history.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.In 1995, the Miami University (located in Ohio) student newspaper asked Miami
University to provide disciplinary records on students. This was to track crime trends
on campus. The university refused to release the records. The paper then made a
request using the Ohio Public Records Act. Miami University released the records
but removed all personally identifiable information. They also removed information
such as the date, time, and location of the incidents.
Editors of the paper thought that the university removed too much information
from the records, so they went to the Ohio Supreme Court seeking full disclosure of
the records. In a divided decision, the Ohio Supreme Court agreed and ruled that
FERPA does not cover the disciplinary records. Miami University tried to take the
case to the U.S. Supreme Court, but the Court chose not to hear the case in 1997.
Miami University notified the U.S. Department of Education (ED) that it did not
think it was able to comply with FERPA based on the decision. The university also
adopted a policy of releasing disciplinary records to any third-party requestor. Ohio
State University also released similar records and notified ED that it planned to
honor future requests. ED disagreed and thought that the Ohio Supreme Court made
a mistake.
ED filed a motion to stop both universities from releasing these records. The U.S.
district in the Southern District of Ohio heard the case. The universities did not
dispute the facts and were willing to allow the court to rule. However, the school
newspaper filed a motion to intervene. Although the newspaper was not named in
the suit, it wanted its voice heard.
The newspaper claimed that ED did not have authority in the case. Instead, ED
could take action only after the release of records, not before. However, the circuit
court disagreed. It determined that ED did have authority. Additionally, the circuit
court determined that disciplinary records are education records and covered by
FERPA. The court ordered the universities not to release the information.
The newspaper appealed this decision to the U.S. Court of Appeals, arguing that
FERPA violates the First Amendment and the district court did not recognize this
violation. However, the U.S. Court of Appeals upheld the district court’s decision in
2002. Even today, schools must not release student disciplinary records without
student consent.
ED documents related to the Miami University case are available at
http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/library/unofmiami.html and
http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/courtcases/miami.html.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter covered several laws designed to protect the rights of children
and students. The COPPA protects the information of children. It prohibits
websites from collecting information about children without a parent’s
consent. COPPA defines a child as anyone under the age of 13.
The CIPA requires schools and libraries to filter website traffic. CIPA ensures
that children do not view objectionable material from these publicly funded
locations. CIPA defines a child as anyone under the age of 17.
The FERPA requires schools to protect educational records. Schools need
written consent before releasing educational records. The student or parent
has the right to review these records. FERPA grants these rights to the
parent until the child reaches the age of 18. At that point, the right passes to
the student.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Parental controls
Proxy server
Technology protection measure (TPM)
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.CHAPTER 5 ASSESSMENT
1. Obscenity is easy to define.
A. True
B. False
2. Website operators who attempt to restrict access for children may be accused of
violating basic rights. What amendment concerns these rights?
A.
B.
C.
D.
First Amendment
Fifth Amendment
Ninth Amendment
Tenth Amendment
3. Which law is designed to protect children’s personal information while they are
using online resources?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
CIPA
COPPA
FERPA
Bill of Rights
All of these are correct.
4. COPPA defines “child” as anyone under the age of ________.
5. How can a website operator verify parental consent to comply with COPPA?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Using signed, printed forms
Using toll-free numbers
Using email
Using signed, printed forms and toll-free numbers
None of these is correct.
6. A website is collecting information on children. What must be included on the
website to comply with COPPA?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Parental consent forms
Privacy policy
Definition of children
a Contact Us page
All of these are correct.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.7. Libraries and schools that accept E-Rate funds must comply with ________.
8. Libraries and schools that accept E-Rate funds must implement a ________ to
filter objectionable content.
9. CIPA requires certain content to be restricted for minors. How old is a minor?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Anyone under the age of 13
Anyone under the age of 16
Anyone under the age of 17
Anyone under the age of 18
Anyone under the age of 21
10. CIPA requires a library to be able to disable the TPM for some situations.
A. True
B. False
11. What law governs the release of student educational information?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
CIPA
COPPA
FERPA
Department of Education
All of these are correct.
12. Under FERPA, what type of information can a school release about a student
without the student’s consent?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Directory information
Personally identifiable information (PII)
Name and student ID number
All of these are correct.
None of these is correct.
13. A parent believes a school is not following FERPA requirements. After trying to
resolve it with the school, where can they file a formal complaint?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
FERPA compliance office
Family Policy Compliance Office
Federal Communications Commission
Federal Trade Commission
Office of Federal Student Aid
14. What must a school obtain before releasing information about a student to a
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.third party?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Verbal consent
Written consent
Signed affidavit
Notarized consent
Nothing
15. Disciplinary records are a part of educational records.
A. True
B. False
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.ENDNOTES
1. Rideout, V., and Robb, M. B. (2019). The Common Sense census: Media use by
tweens and teens, 2019. San Francisco, CA: Common Sense Media,
https://www.commonsensemedia.org/research/the-common-sense-census-
media-use-by-tweens-and-teens-2019 (accessed March 24, 2020).
2. Federal Trade Commission, “Google and YouTube Will Pay Record $170 Million
for Alleged Violations of Children’s Privacy Law,” September 4, 2019.
https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2019/09/google-youtube-will-
pay-record-170-million-alleged-violations (accessed March 24, 2020).
3. American Civil Liberties Union, “Court Orders Missouri School District to Stop
Censoring LGBT Websites,” February 15, 2012. https://www.aclu.org/press-
releases/court-orders-missouri-school-district-stop-censoring-lgbt-websites
(accessed March 24, 2020).
4. Reno v. American Civil Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844 (1997).
5. Jacobellis v. Ohio, 378 U.S. 184 (1964).
6. Miller v. California, 413 U.S. 15 (1973).
7. United States Code, Title 15, sec. 6501–6506.
8. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, sec. 312.2.
9. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, sec. 312.8.
10. Federal Trade Commission, “Children’s Online Privacy Protection Rule: A Six-
Step Compliance Plan for Your Business,” June 2017. https://www.ftc.gov/tips-
advice/business-center/guidance/childrens-online-privacy-protection-rule-six-
step-compliance (accessed March 24, 2020).
11. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 26, sec. 312.3.
12. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 26, sec. 312.4.
13. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 26, sec. 312.4.
14. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 26, sec. 312.5.
15. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 26, sec. 312.5.
16. Pub. L. No. 106-554, 114 Stat. 2763A-335, codified in scattered sections of U.S.
Code.
17. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, sec. 54.520.
18. United States v. American Library Association, 201 F.Supp.2d 401 (E.D. Pa.
2002), reversed 539 U.S. 194 (2003).
19. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, sec. 54.520.
20. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, sec. 54.520.
21. U.S. Department of Commerce, National Telecommunications and Information
Administration, Report to Congress, “Children’s Internet Protection Act Study of
Technology Protection Measures in Section 1703,” August 2003.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
https://www.ntia.doc.gov/files/ntia/publications/cipareport08142003.pdf
(accessed March 24, 2020).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, sec. 54.520.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 47, sec. 54.520.
United States Code, Title 20, sec. 1232g.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.3.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.7.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.7.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.10.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.12.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.7.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.20.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.30.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.31.
U.S. Department of Education, “FERPA and the Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19),” March 2020. https://studentprivacy.ed.gov/resources/ferpa-and-
coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19 (accessed March 24, 2020).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.32.
Federal Register 73, No. 237 at 74,843–74,844, background information (2008).
U.S. Department of Education, “Dear Colleague Letter GEN -16-12,” July 1,
2016. https://ifap.ed.gov/dear-colleague-letters/07-01-2016-gen-16-12-subject-
protecting-student-information (accessed March 24, 2020).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 34, sec. 99.64.
FERPA SHERPA, “State Student Privacy Laws,” Last updated 2019.
https://ferpasherpa.org/state-laws/ (accessed March 24, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:44:25.
