CHAPTER
13
Information Security Governance
HIS CHAPTER DISCUSSES information security governance. It also discusses
information security policies. An organization’s governance structure is an
important part of its information security program. Governance focuses on the
structure used to protect resources and data. This structure must support business
needs and provide security. Strong governance helps create strong security
programs.
T
Organizations use policies, standards, guidelines, and procedures to create their
security program. These documents help guide employee conduct and state the
organization’s rules for how information technology resources are secured. They
also help protect an organization from legal liability.
Chapter 13 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
What information security governance is
What information security governance documents are
What recommended information security policies are
What some case studies and examples are
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.Chapter 13 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the key concepts and terms associated with information
security governance
Describe the goals of different information security governance
documents
Describe the different types of policies that can be used to govern
information security
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.What Is Information Security Governance?
For almost any organization, data is a valuable asset. Yet, over 50 percent of large
corporations report that they do not treat data as a business asset. 1 An organization
must find ways to use its data to meet its business goals, such as providing services
to consumers and making a profit. It also must protect its data. This balance is key to
an organization’s success. Failing to strike the right balance can harm the
organization’s goals. Consider the following:
An organization cannot market its products without access to customer lists.
Customers may complain about incorrect electronic data.
If confidential data is disclosed, an organization faces embarrassment.
An organization’s executive management team is responsible for governing the
organization. This means it is also responsible for information security
governance (ISG), the executive management team’s responsibility to protect an
organization’s information assets. ISG makes protecting information assets a
business decision. To do this, an organization must align its information security
goals to its business needs. ISG moves information security beyond technical
decisions and makes security a strategic decision.
NOTE
The security goals of confidentiality, integrity, and availability are called the C-I-A triad or the A-I-C triad.
Organizations use ISG to enhance their business. ISG makes sure that
information security concepts are applied in a way that helps meet business goals.
ISG also makes sure that there is proper accountability and oversight for meeting
these goals. The C-I-A triad appears in FIGURE 13-1.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.FIGURE 13-1
The C-I-A triad.
Description
Information Security Governance Planning
ISG refers to executive management’s responsibility to provide strategic direction,
oversight, and accountability for the security of its data and information technology
(IT) resources. Their main duty is to make sure that the information security strategy
supports its business goals.
A common business goal is to make a profit. The organization must consider
many factors that affect this goal. Business drivers are the forces that influence the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.organization’s business goals. They can be internal or external and include people,
processes, and trends. Common business drivers may include the availability of raw
materials and employees, the location of factories, and the costs of transporting
products to market.
An organization must balance business drivers to meet its goals. They do this
during the business planning process. There are three types of business planning.
They are:
Strategic planning—This is long-term planning. Strategic planning focuses on
preparing new approaches and planning for new products, technologies, or
processes. It lays the groundwork for new business directions.
Tactical planning—This is short- to medium-term planning. Tactical planning
allows organizations to be responsive to market conditions. It allows them to take
advantage of short-term or unexpected opportunities. Tactical plans are usually 6
months or less in length.
Operational planning—This is day-to-day planning. Operational planning
focuses on the normal operations of an organization. It is responsive to daily
issues.
FIGURE 13-2 illustrates the different types of business planning.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.FIGURE 13-2
Business planning hierarchy.
Description
The organization’s executive management team carries out strategic planning.
This is when it determines the business’s goals. Once it determines its business
goals, it must figure out how information security can help support these goals. It will
use the same types of planning strategies to think about information security. This is
ISG planning. When planning for information security, the organization must think
about:
Information needs—The organization must ask how it uses data to meet its
business goals. It must then think about how information security can support this.
For instance, if an organization conducts most of its business on the internet, it
may need to focus its attention on techniques to ensure availability and integrity.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.Its IT systems must hold accurate data and be ready to conduct business.
Regulatory requirements—The organization must know its regulatory landscape.
It must know the data protection laws that it must follow. Often these laws focus on
protecting the confidentiality of certain types of data.
Risk management—The organization must adopt a risk management approach.
It must know the information security risks that it faces. It also must prioritize that
risk and decide how it will respond to it.
Security failures—The organization must think about information security failures
and how those failures might harm the business. For instance, it must consider the
impact of a security breach, malware-infected IT resources, or unavailable data.
There are many negative impacts of an information security failure. These include
lawsuits and breach notification costs. An organization will certainly lose
customers after an information security incident. This affects its bottom line.
NOTE
A 2019 survey found the average organizational cost of a data breach in the United States is almost $4
million. 2
An organization answers these questions to determine ISG strategic direction. It
makes sure that its information security goals support its business objectives. This is
the role of ISG.
Common Information Security Governance Roles
It is important to know who makes information security decisions, whether they are
strategic, tactical, or operational. Not every organization has the same structure.
Organizations can have different legal forms, such as corporations, partnerships, or
limited liability companies. These legal forms are governed by state law. This section
reviews ISG roles. You will be more likely to find the roles described here in larger
organizations, such as corporations. Smaller organizations may not fill all of these
roles; rather, they may combine many duties within one role. Nonprofit and
educational organizations may also have different roles for people. These
organizations tend to have structures with many shared responsibilities.
Many different roles can make decisions about information security. The typical
ISG roles are:
Board of directors
Chief information officer
Chief information security officer
Information security managers
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.The board of directors (BOD), an organization’s top governance group, runs the
organization. A BOD is required by law to act with due care. It must make all of its
decisions in the best interests of the organization. The BOD plans an organization’s
strategic direction and determines its business goals. It makes sure that an
organization uses its resources effectively to meet these goals. Finally, it makes sure
that an organization acts legally. If an organization does not have a BOD, then its
top-ranking executive group performs these duties.
The BOD determines how information security will reduce risk and support
business goals through strategic planning. The BOD issues high-level information
security policies and delegates tactical and operational activities to other senior
managers. The main duty of a BOD is governance for the organization and for
information security.
The chief information officer (CIO) is the organization’s senior IT official. The
CIO focuses on strategic IT issues and defines the organization’s IT mission. It is the
CIO’s job to keep the BOD advised about IT issues. CIOs are not usually involved in
day-to-day IT operations. Their duties are strategic and tactical in nature. They often
delegate responsibility for information security management (ISM) to a CISO.
A CIO is not the same as a chief technology officer (CTO). A CIO is
responsible for a company’s internal IT systems and focuses on the systems used to
run the organization’s business. A CIO tends to be internally focused. In contrast, a
CTO develops a company’s technology products. These are the products that the
company delivers to its customers. A CTO tends to be externally focused.
The chief information security officer (CISO) is the organization’s senior
information security official. The role of the CISO is relatively new and continues to
evolve. Depending on an organization’s structure, the CISO might report to the CIO.
A CISO also could report to the organization’s chief financial officer (CFO). CISOs
are responsible for an organization’s information security strategy. They also are
very involved in tactical planning. However, they are not generally involved in daily IT
operations.
The CISO makes sure that the CIO and BOD understand information security
threats and how to respond to those threats. The CISO may make information
security policy suggestions to the BOD. A CISO also helps determine information
security safeguards, and usually delegates functional and operational tasks to other
managers.
NOTE
In March 2009, U.S. President Barack Obama appointed the first federal CIO, who was responsible for
government IT spending.
Information security managers are responsible for the functional management of
an organization’s information security program. They manage the operational
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.activities and implement the controls specified by the CISO. These managers might
also:
Create information security standards, guidelines, and procedures
Participate in risk assessments
Manage the security infrastructure
These roles work together. The higher-level roles make governance decisions,
whereas the lower-level roles are responsible for carrying out ISM and operational
activities.
Information Security Governance and Management
ISG and ISM are not the same thing. Although the terms are often used
interchangeably, the distinction is subtle. You should keep in mind that sometimes
the difference is not clear. Many organizations use one or both terms to refer to all
ISG and ISM activities. Many activities have both ISG and ISM elements.
ISG, which is handled by the BOD, CIO, and CISO, makes sure that security is
used to support business goals. It offers a process for oversight and accountability
and makes sure that there is a structure in place to direct information security
activities.
Creating an Information Security Governance Program
There are many resources available to help organizations create an ISG program. The International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) have created a
comprehensive standard to help guide this process. 3 The standard uses the term ISM system to refer to both
ISG and ISM activities.
The standard helps organizations create an ISM system by using a risk-based approach. It reviews how to
operate, monitor, review, maintain, and improve the ISM system. It walks through each step and outlines the
processes that an organization must consider at each step.
Any organization can use this standard, as it is designed to be flexible to meet an organization’s needs. It can
be especially helpful to organizations that have never managed information security on a strategic level. It is
also designed to work with the ISO/IEC security controls standard called “ISO/IEC 27002:2013, Information
Technology—Security Techniques—Code of Practice for Information Security Controls.”
Organizations must review their ISM systems regularly. They need to know if their ISM controls are improving
security. To do this, they must measure their effectiveness. The ISO/IEC has guidance on this as well. That
document is titled “ISO/IEC 27004:2016 Information Technology—Security Techniques—Information Security
Management—Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis, and Evaluation.”
This standard helps organizations review their ISM system. It helps organizations create control
measurements and analyze the measurements. The process helps organizations decide if their policies or
controls need to be changed.
ISM, the organization’s day-to-day security operations, is the visible part of ISG
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.activities. It makes sure that ISG policies are put into practice. ISM maintains the
organization’s overall security posture. ISG states what that posture must be. TABLE
13-1 compares ISG and ISM.
TABLE 13-1 Comparison of Information Security Governance and Information
Security Management
INFORMATION SECURITY GOVERNANCE INFORMATION SECURITY MANAGEMENT
Strategic and tactical Tactical and operational
Creates policies and strategy Implements policies and strategy
Ultimate compliance authority and oversight Day-to-day management and authority
BOD, CIO, CISO CISO and information security managers
Information Security Governance in the Federal
Government
Congress created the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) to
protect federal data and IT resources. 4 Federal agencies fall under the executive
branch of the U.S. government and report to the president of the United States. U.S.
federal agencies must comply with FISMA.
FISMA requires each federal agency to develop an information security program
and name a CISO to lead the program. The program must assess the agency’s
information security risk, include plans to reduce that risk, and provide security
awareness and training activities to employees. Agencies must report on their
FISMA compliance progress each year. They send these reports to the Government
Accountability Office (GAO).
NOTE
You can view the GAO high-risk website at https://www.gao.gov/highrisk/overview.
Information security is a high priority for the federal government. Since 1997, the
GAO has included protecting the nation’s information systems and cyber critical
infrastructure on its “high risk list.” Issues are high-risk if they are vulnerable to fraud,
waste, abuse, or mismanagement. The GAO publishes the list every 2 years. 5
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.Information Security Governance Documents
An organization’s ISG documents form the basis of its information security program.
They document the organization’s commitment to information security. They are
used to address:
The organization’s information security goals
How the organization protects its own data
How the organization protects the data of others
Compliance with legal and regulatory requirements
Employee information security responsibilities
Consequences for failing to meet responsibilities
Organizations use policies, standards, guidelines, and procedures to create their
security program. These documents work together to support information security
goals. A formal policy is the highest-level governance document. Standards are the
next level. Then procedures. Guidelines provide security advice. The documents
move from the general (policies) to the more specific (procedure). FIGURE 13-3
shows how these documents work together.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.FIGURE 13-3
Information security governance documents.
Description
For purposes of this discussion, these documents are collectively referred to as
“ISG documents” or “policies.” You should keep in mind that the term policies is often
used in a very generic way. It is used to describe the entire suite of ISG documents.
It will be clear from the text when the term is used in the generic way.
NOTE
ISG documents are administrative safeguards.
Policies
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.A formal policy is executive management’s high-level statement of information
security direction and goals. They are the top level of governance documents and
help minimize risk by laying out the organization’s information security strategy.
High-level policies are approved by an organization’s BOD.
The BOD uses policies to set forth its information security goals. They also state
compliance expectations. Not all organizations will have the same types of high-level
policies. They are unique to each organization. Each organization develops policies
by reviewing its regulatory landscape, taking into account the size and complexity of
the organization and its IT systems. They also think about how information security
can be used to help meet business goals.
Policies must be drafted with care. Policy elements vary among organizations.
However, there are some common elements to all policies. They include:
Policy statement—States the expected behavior, actions, or outcomes. It is a
clear statement of permitted or forbidden actions.
Policy exclusions—Lists situations or people who are not covered by the policy.
For the most part, there should not be many exclusions in a high-level policy.
Policy rationale—States the reason why the policy exists. This includes the legal
or regulatory reasons for the policy. A policy might be drafted in response to
information security threats.
Policy definitions—Defines terms that have special meaning. Terms with
common definitions do not need to be defined.
Who is affected by the policy—States the people, units, or departments affected
by the policy. In a high-level policy, this usually is all of the organization’s
employees.
Who must follow the policy—Lists who must follow the policy as part of their job
responsibilities, or if some people have special policy responsibilities because of
their job duties.
Compliance language—States how the organization will enforce the policy. It
also states what happens to units and employees who fail to follow the policy.
Related documents—Lists other documents that are related to the policy.
Standards or procedures that support the policy should be listed in this section.
Policy contact—Lists the person who is responsible for answering questions
about the policy.
Policy history—Lists historical data about the policy. This section should list
revision and review dates.
High-level policies are concise and tightly worded so that they are easy to
understand. A high-level information security policy states the organization’s
information security expectations. They should be written in a way so that all
employees can understand them. These high-level documents do not usually include
explanations about how to meet those expectations. Supporting documents, such as
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.standards, guidelines, and procedures, provide that detail.
FYI
The SANS Institute has a policy web page that gives drafting advice. It also has sample policies. You can
view this resource at http://www.sans.org/security-resources/policies/.
Policy documents tend to go through a lengthy development and review process.
The process can be very time consuming because policies are high-level
governance documents from executive management. They have a broad scope and
address the whole organization. Most policy development processes include multiple
levels of review so that other leaders within the organization have a chance to
comment on the policies while they are being developed. These leaders will tell
executive management how the policy will affect their units or departments.
Policies are rarely changed because they contain language that sets forth
general expectations. The broad goals stated in a policy should not need to be
changed often. Standards and procedures are used to provide flexibility and are
easier to change. An organization can easily update these documents in response to
changing technology conditions.
Standards
Standards support high-level policies and state the activities and actions needed to
meet policy goals. They are just below policies in the ISG documents hierarchy.
Standards are more specific than policies. Standards may require employees to take
(or refrain from) certain actions and often state a minimum level of behavior or
actions that must be met to comply with a policy. This is called a baseline.
Standards are technology neutral. They do not refer to specific technologies or
products. Instead, they refer to the safeguards and controls an organization should
use to protect data and IT resources.
Several different ISG levels can create standards. They are usually created at the
CIO or CISO level. However, an organization’s BOD is not usually involved in
creating standards. An organization usually develops standards with input from
information security managers because they have overall organizational
responsibility for implementing information security. They are the subject matter
experts in what it will take to implement the standard.
Procedures
Procedures are the lowest level of ISG documents. They are step-by-step checklists
that explain “how” to meet security goals or conduct security-related activities.
Organizations often tailor their procedures to a certain type of technology. They also
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.can be limited to the activities of specific departments or end users.
Procedures usually only address single tasks. They are designed to be flexible so
they can change as technology changes. Information security managers usually
create procedures, although a CIO or CISO may sometimes review procedures. For
the most part, however, procedures are department- or technology-specific
documents.
Governance Documents Work Together
Policies, standards, and procedures work together to protect information security. Policies set forth the
general expectation. Standards further define those expectations. Procedures tell end users how to comply
with the expectations. An example might work as follows:
Policy Statement: All employees must use multifactor authentication to access organizational IT resources.
Standard Statement: Employees may use any of the multifactor authentication solutions provided by the
information security department to access IT systems. Employees may use either the business-provided
authenticator application on their mobile device or may use a physical token device.
Procedural Statement: To obtain the authentication application or a physical token device, employees must
come to the technology center between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. from Monday through Friday. Employees
must bring their employee identification card and a state-issued identification card to receive access to the
application or their token.
In this example, an employee knows what the expectation is (“multifactor authentication”), how the
expectation is defined (“technology provided by the information security department”), and how to meet the
expectation (“go to the technology center”).
Guidelines
Guidelines are the most flexible type of ISG document. Organizations can issue
guidelines for several reasons. They issue guidelines to:
Encourage employees to adopt good information security practices
Educate employees about security threats and how to respond to them
Encourage employees to take action in areas that the organization cannot
An organization can use guidelines to give information security advice. They can
recommend actions that an employee can apply on his or her own. The guidelines
help employees adopt behaviors that improve information security. Sometimes they
address specific kinds of employee behavior. They also might address a specific
security issue. For example, an organization might create a guideline to help
employees learn how to avoid social engineering attacks.
Organizations might issue guidelines to address issues that they cannot control
through technical measures or organizational authority. This is where the
organization needs its employees to help it protect IT resources. They hope that they
can encourage employees to read the guidelines and take individual action.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.For example, an organization may allow its employees to access its IT systems
from home because it increases productivity. It allows employees to work from home
on days when they otherwise would not be working. (For example, if a parent stays
home to care for a sick child or if an office is closed due to a global health
pandemic.) Employees may use their home personal computing equipment to
complete their work in these situations. However, the organization must safeguard its
IT resources from security threats introduced by this activity, such as malware that
might be on an employee’s home computer that could be transmitted to the
organization’s IT resources.
The organization has no real way to make employees use good security
practices at home. It has no real authority to require employees to protect their home
computers. To encourage employees to secure their home computers, the
organization can issue a guideline. The guideline outlines security safeguards that
employees can use at home. Following the guideline benefits employees because it
helps them secure their own personal data. It also helps protect the organization’s IT
resources if the employee follows the recommended practices. Both the employee’s
computer and the organization’s IT resources are protected. It is a winning situation
for everyone.
Creating Information Security Policies
Each type of ISG document has a different role and focus. They might be directed at
different audiences. They might address similar issues from different standpoints.
However, they do share some similarities. These similarities include:
They must be easy to understand.
They must have a well-defined scope.
They must be regularly reviewed.
They must be communicated to all employees.
First, the documents must be easy to read. All employees must be able to
understand them. Even if the subject matter deals with legal issues, the document
itself should be free from legalese. The documents should not use technical jargon.
The only time it is OK to use complex language is when it is needed to help
employees know their responsibilities. Otherwise, these documents must be
understandable so that employees can follow them.
Second, ISG documents must have a clear scope. They must clearly address a
specific aspect of the organization’s security program. Employees should not have to
consult many high-level documents to determine the organization’s stance on a
single issue. Ensuring that policy scope is clearly outlined helps employees follow
the policy.
Third, the organization must regularly review its ISG documents. Information
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.security does not exist in a vacuum. Risks change. Laws change. Technology
changes. An organization must respond to these changes in its security program. To
do this, they must review their ISG documents on a regular basis to make sure that
they are current.
Finally, an organization must communicate the ISG documents to its employees.
Employees cannot follow policies that they do not know about. Good communication
makes sure that employees view ISG documents as business enablers.
Organizations can communicate ISG documents to employees in several ways.
They can use newsletters, in-person and online training, or company-wide email
messages. Many communication mechanisms should be used to make sure that
employees know about the ISG documents.
Policy Development Process
An organization should create a structured ISG document development process. It
may even want to consider writing a “policy on policies” to specify the formal
process. A formal process gives many units, departments, and stakeholders the
opportunity to comment on a policy. This is very important for high-level policies that
apply to the whole organization. A formal process also makes sure that final policies
are communicated to employees. It also provides organizations with a way to make
sure that policies are reviewed regularly.
Legalese Versus Plain Language
Legalese is an unflattering term used to describe legal writing. Legalese is language that uses too many legal
phrases and many Latin terms. It usually has long sentences with many commas that are dense and hard to
read. Lawyers are needed to translate documents written in legalese.
There is a growing trend in the legal profession to write documents in plain language. This means that
documents are written in the language that people use when they speak to help make documents more
understandable. People can understand these documents faster. They also are less likely to misunderstand
them.
The trend is to use plain language to write formal documents. However, legalese appears in high-level
policies on a regular basis because these documents are formal governance documents. An organization’s
legal counsel often writes them.
Legalese can make it hard to understand some very simple concepts. This is frustrating for people who need
to follow the policies. Some examples of legalese and plain language follow. Are there other ways that you
can make these policy statements easier to read?
Example 1—Consent
Legalese: All users of the organization’s information technology resources, as a condition to the use of such
resources, specifically consent to the general rights of the organization as specified herein.
Plain Language: All users of the organization’s IT resources agree to the terms of this policy.
Example 2—Least Privilege
Legalese: Any access permitted hereunder shall be the minimum access required in order to protect the
organization’s interests.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.Plain Language: Access to IT resources is limited to the minimum amount needed.
Example 3—Warranties
Legalese: The organization makes no warranties of any kind with respect to the organization’s information
technology resources it provides. The organization will not be responsible for damages resulting from the use
of the organization’s information technology resources, including, but not limited to, loss of data resulting from
delays, non-deliveries, missed deliveries, or service interruptions caused by the negligence of an
organization employee, or by any user’s error or omissions. The organization specifically denies any
responsibility for the accuracy or quality of information obtained through the organization’s information
technology resources.
Plain Language: The organization provides IT resources “as is.” The organization makes no promises about
service level or data accuracy. The organization is not responsible for errors. Use of IT resources is at a
user’s own risk.
In general, a policy development process should include the following steps:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Development
Stakeholder review
Management approval
Communication to employees
Documentation of compliance or exceptions
Continued awareness activities
Maintenance and review
The need for a new ISG document is determined in the development phase. The
BOD, CIO, or CISO might decide that there is a need for a high-level policy. An
information security department might also notice situations that require a new high-
level document to guide the organization. The idea for a new ISG document really
can come from anywhere in an organization. This section focuses on how high-level
policies are created. However, a similar development process is recommended for
other ISG documents, such as standards and procedures, as well.
Once a policy need is identified, the BOD must determine the goals of the policy.
To do this, it reviews several areas. It looks at its use of IT resources and reviews the
data that it is legally required to protect. It considers its business objectives. An
organization’s CIO or CISO will give advice about information security issues. The
BOD also might consider how other companies in the same industry approach a
certain type of issue. After this review, the BOD establishes the policy goals.
An organization must take care when it drafts high-level policies. It must make
sure that a new high-level policy does not conflict with any previously issued policy.
Stakeholders must review the draft when it is finished.
FYI
In drafting an ISG document, it is important to be consistent. A writer should use consistent grammar,
punctuation, and format. This makes the document more readable. It also makes it easier for employees to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.understand the document.
At the next step, stakeholders review the ISG draft documents. Stakeholders are
interested parties. They are employees and departments that will be affected by the
new policy. They also may be subject matter experts in the underlying policy subject
matter. IT resource managers also will review the document at this point. They do
this to make sure that they can implement technical controls to meet the policy.
This also is the step where legal counsel, risk management, and audit will review
the document. These groups make sure that the document meets the organization’s
regulatory needs. Risk management and audit departments will want to make sure
that they can measure policy compliance actions. Legal counsel makes sure that the
document helps protect the organization from legal liability. The organization may
revise the policy many times during this step.
The policy must be signed when it is in final form. The BOD must always review
and sign high-level information security policies. Their support is crucial for a
successful information security program. They do not always sign lower-level
documents. The executive with authority over certain tasks may sign lower-level
documents; for example, a CIO or CISO might sign standards or guidelines.
Departmental managers and supervisors may sign procedures for their specific
areas. Each organization will make its own rules about who needs to approve and
sign each level of ISG document.
The next step, the communication step, is the most critical step in the
development process. Communication is necessary to make sure that all employees
know about the new policy. It helps employees know where to find resources to
follow the policy. Organizations can communicate new policies in several different
ways. Internal newsletters, memos, and company-wide emails can all be used to
inform employees about a new policy.
As part of the overall development process, an organization must measure policy
compliance. It must know how departments act to meet policy requirements. It also
must note any exceptions to compliance. An organization can show compliance by
documenting the following:
When the ISG document was approved
How and when it was communicated to employees
Actions departments took to meet the responsibilities stated in the ISG document
Deviations from the requirements in the ISG document
Sometimes departments might request an exception to a policy. They can
request an exception for several reasons. For example, a policy might state a
technical control that an IT system cannot meet for a very legitimate reason. Or it
might require an action that a business unit cannot take because of some other
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.regulatory requirement.
Organizations must have a formal way to review policy exception requests. For
example, the BOD must review, approve, and document each high-level policy
exception request. A BOD might assign this role to an upper management official
with technology expertise such as a CIO or CISO. Exception requests from
standards and procedures might be handled by the CIO or CISO as well.
An organization must carefully consider exception requests. This is because
every policy exception weakens the organization’s overall security posture. There
are two main reasons to grant a policy exception request. The first is when following
the policy negatively affects the organization’s business objectives. This might
happen when a policy control interferes with a critical business process.
NOTE
Compliance is an ongoing process that organizations must continuously monitor.
The second reason to approve an exception request is when the cost to comply
with the policy is more than the cost of noncompliance. For example, an organization
may grant an exception request if a particular IT resource is incapable of technically
meeting a policy requirement. It might do this if buying new equipment is too
expensive. In those cases, the organization still must implement controls to protect
the IT resource. The policy exception request must document how an area will use
compensating controls to meet the spirit of the policy.
The development process must continually educate employees about policy
compliance. Ongoing security training and awareness are required to keep
employees aware of their responsibilities. An organization must build regular policy
awareness activities into its day-to-day routine. For example, they can be included in
other training programs, such as workplace safety programs.
Finally, an organization must review its ISG documents on a regular schedule.
They must make sure the documents continue to reflect business and information
security goals. Sometimes internal or external factors change so much that an
organization must change its policies. At this point, it can either update its policy or
withdraw it and create a new one. A BOD demonstrates due diligence and
reasonable care when it regularly reviews its policies. FIGURE 13-4 shows the policy
development process.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.FIGURE 13-4
Policy development process.
Description
An organization can adjust the development process if necessary. For example, it
might need to create a new policy to respond to a new law. It can step that policy
through the development process quickly, then go back and review the document
once the urgent regulatory need has passed. In addition, the process can be
shortened for some ISG documents. Standards and procedures that apply to one
department only may go through an expedited review process. This is because there
may not be as many people who need to comment on them.
An organization uses ISG documents to support its business objectives and
information security goals. These policies form the basis of an information security
program. They also set the tone for a culture of information security awareness.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.Recommended Information Security Policies
Information security policies will vary greatly across organizations because all
organizations are different. They have different business goals. Their security needs
are not the same. Their cultures are different.
The list of information security issues to address in a policy is endless. However,
all organizations face some basic security issues. They should create policies to
address these issues. The basic policies that organizations should consider include:
Acceptable use policies
Anti-harassment policies
Workplace privacy and monitoring policies
Data retention and destruction policies
Intellectual property policies
Authentication and password policies
Security awareness and training policies
These policies address use of IT resources and the data in those resources. Often
information security and human resources (HR) departments will work together on
some of these policies. Business and auditing offices might help administer some of
these types of policies.
Acceptable Use Policies
An organization uses an acceptable use policy (AUP) to tell employees how to
properly use organizational IT resources. Organizations should consider drafting an
AUP because IT resources are valuable business assets. They are often expensive
to buy and maintain. They also contain data that is valuable to the organization.
Organizations provide employees access to IT resources to support business
goals. In addition to system access, many organizations give their employees email
accounts and internet access. Some also give their executives mobile devices.
Although employees are supposed to use these resources for business purposes,
that is not always the case. Employees can use these resources in many non-
business ways. Some of these uses include:
Sending and receiving personal emails at a work email address
Chain mail and hoax email messages sent around the office
Non-business internet use (such as online shopping)
Accessing social networking sites during work hours
Downloading free software (or pirated software) for business or non-business use
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.File sharing throughout a workplace or over the internet
Improper use of an organization’s IT resources can be costly. It can result in
information security compromises, introduce malware onto IT systems, or lead to
unintentional data loss. An organization might be legally responsible for an
employee’s misuse of IT resources in some instances. Non-business use of IT
resources can also distract employees and can lead to lost productivity.
An AUP can help prevent some of these issues. An AUP is a code of conduct
that states permitted uses of IT resources. It also lists prohibited actions. Finally, it
states the consequences for violating the acceptable use rules. An AUP is one of the
most important information security policy documents. It can help prevent a wide
range of activities that could harm the organization’s IT resources.
An AUP can address several concerns including personnel, legal, and
information security issues. HR departments like AUPs because they help promote
workplace productivity. They also want to make sure that employees are not
accessing or sharing objectionable electronic materials. Such behavior can cause
severe disruptions in the workplace. In some instances, it also can subject the
organization to liability for its employees’ actions. For instance, an employer can be
held responsible in some cases where an employee is using IT resources to harass
other individuals. AUPs give HR departments a rules-based reason to terminate
employees who use IT resources inappropriately.
Would an AUP Help in This Situation?
The “I Love You” or “Love Bug” worm was discovered in May 2000. At the time, it was thought to be one of
the largest and most destructive computer worms ever. It spread via email messages with “ILOVEYOU” in the
subject line. The messages included an attachment disguised as a love letter. Once a user opened the
attachment (and who would not open a love letter?), the worm infected the user’s computer. It sent itself to
everyone in the user’s email address book and destroyed computer files. It also searched for sensitive
information and sent it back to its creator.
At one point, industry experts estimated that the worm affected computers at more than 80 percent of U.S.
businesses. Could an information security policy have helped stop the spread of the worm? What if an AUP
stated that employees could not open email attachments that they were not expecting? What if the
consequence for opening that type of attachment included job termination? Would that have helped in this
case?
FYI
Lost productivity is not a new issue for organizations. Coffee breaks and water-cooler chats have always
been productivity concerns. The internet and ease of access to non-work-related information and
entertainment is a relatively new nuisance.
Legal departments use AUPs to help an organization meet regulatory
responsibilities. They also use them to help limit an organization’s legal liability. For
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.instance, an AUP can state that employees may not use unlicensed software on
their computers. This helps protect the organization from copyright infringement
claims. An organization protects itself in these cases by pointing to its AUP and
showing that the employee violated it. If the AUP forbids the action, the legal
department has evidence that the employee acted in violation of company rules. This
helps create a legal defense.
Information security departments also are interested in making sure that an
organization has a well-written AUP. Improper use of IT resources can have
information security consequences. Employees surfing the internet, exchanging
personal emails, or visiting social networking sites are consuming network
bandwidth. They may be using valuable network storage space for non-business
content such as music or pictures.
Their activities also could introduce malware onto the organization’s IT systems.
Malware could compromise data and have wide-ranging consequences. At a
minimum, productivity is hampered while IT departments work to remove the
malware. At its worst, the malware could transmit sensitive organizational
information to external attackers. It also could expose personally identifiable
information. The disclosure of that type of information could trigger state breach
notification laws.
AUPs also address internal employee threats. For example, employees can
potentially use their access to IT resources to snoop, spy on, or steal from the
organization. They also could spy on other employees. Disgruntled employees could
use their access to sabotage IT resources and data. An AUP specifically prohibits
these actions. An organization can fire an employee for violating an AUP.
AUP Terms
An organization protects against these concerns by having a written AUP. Some
general terms that you see in AUPs include:
IT resources are provided for business use only.
Employees must use IT resources and data on them for business purposes only.
Employees must not tamper with IT resources or data on those resources.
Employees should not access any data they do not have a business reason to
see.
No personal use of organizational IT resources is allowed.
Do not use IT resources to circumvent security measures.
IT resources may be monitored to ensure employee compliance.
Use of IT resources is evidence of the employee’s consent to the terms of the
AUP.
AUPs may also include terms about a particular type of IT resource, such as email or
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.internet use. Some organizations include these terms in one broad AUP. Other
organizations may create a separate AUP for each type of technology. Common
email and internet AUP terms include:
1. Do not send email with sensitive organization information to external recipients.
2. Do not send email with sensitive organization information to internal recipients
unless they have a business need to have that information.
3. Do not send email with offensive text, pictures, or links to offensive websites.
Content is offensive if it is demeaning based on race, gender, national origin,
disability, religion, or politics.
4. Do not open email attachments from unknown senders. Do not open email
messages with unexpected attachments.
5. Do not click on embedded links in an email from unknown senders.
6. Do not download files from the internet without permission from a business
supervisor and the information security department.
7. Do not use file-sharing applications or services without permission from a
business supervisor and the information security department.
8. Do not use IT resources to access the internet to view offensive material.
9. Do not use IT resources to access the internet to visit social networking sites.
10. Do not use IT resources for online shopping or any other personal activity.
11. Do not use IT resources to engage in activity that violates the law.
Mobile devices such as cell phones, smartphones, and personal digital assistants
(PDAs) pose special information security threats. They are small, pocket-sized
computing devices. Use of mobile phones is rising. A 2019 Pew Research Center
report found that 96 percent of U.S. adults have cell phones or smartphones. Thirty-
eight percent of U.S. adults mostly use their smartphones to access the internet. 6
Many people buy their own mobile devices and use them for work purposes,
although organizations sometimes give their employees mobile devices. These
devices pose security threats because they can access or store an organization’s
sensitive information. Employees can use these devices to browse the internet, send
and receive email, and view documents. The computing capacity of these devices
continues to grow. They can store large amounts of data. Many of the same types of
malware that infect larger IT resources also can harm these devices.
Mobile devices also are a vulnerability because of their portable nature. People
can easily lose or misplace their mobile devices. They are also easy to steal. A lost
or stolen mobile device can put an organization’s data at risk.
An AUP places controls on the use of mobile devices for business purposes. In
addition to terms about email and internet use, an AUP might have specific terms
about mobile devices:
Mobile devices that are used to access organizational resources or data must be
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.password protected.
Mobile devices (whether provided by the organization or purchased by an
employee and used for business purposes) must not store sensitive organizational
information.
Employees must immediately report the loss of a mobile device used to access
organizational resources.
Organizations typically make employees aware of their AUPs when the employees
begin employment. They may print it in an employee handbook. Organizations may
ask employees to read the AUP. They also might ask employees to sign an
acknowledgment form that states the employee understands and agrees to follow
the rules in the AUP. The acknowledgment also might state that an employee
understands the consequences for failing to follow an AUP.
Organizations should require employees to review the AUP yearly. They also
must require that employees review the AUP any time it is revised. They may ask
employees to sign a new acknowledgment form at that time. This helps the
organization make sure that employees are aware of their responsibilities.
Enforcement
The 2007 Electronic Monitoring and Surveillance Survey found that 28 percent of
employers have fired employees for email abuse. The same survey said that of
those employees fired for email abuse, 64 percent were fired for violating company
policy. 7 An AUP must specify the consequences for violating it. Consequences for
violating an AUP can include:
Suspension of access to IT resources
Limited access to IT resources
Employee reprimand
Employment suspension
Employment termination
Referral to law enforcement
Modest AUP violations may result in a reprimand or retraining on the AUP terms. In
some cases, an organization may choose to suspend an employee’s access to IT
resources for a period of time. Suspending access to IT resources can be a drastic
response to a violation if an employee’s job role requires IT access. An organization
could fire an employee for a particularly harmful AUP violation. AUP violations that
amount to criminal conduct should be reported to law enforcement. For example, an
organization should notify the police if an employee uses its IT resources to launch a
malware attack.
It can sometimes be hard for organizations to enforce their AUPs because many
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.AUPs require employees to change their behaviors. AUPs are especially hard to
enforce if an organization has no technical methods to monitor compliance. Most
organizations depend on employees to police their own behavior. They may have a
procedure for employees to report AUP violations.
Anti-Harassment Policies
Workplace harassment is a serious issue. Harassment is unwanted verbal or
physical conduct that demeans or threatens a person. Some examples include:
Telling lewd, sexist, or racist jokes
Making racially derogatory comments
Making remarks about body shape, looks, or clothing
Staring at people in a suggestive manner
Making negative comments about a person’s religious beliefs
Threatening a person or his or her family with harm
Workplace harassment can violate federal law. This happens when the unwanted
conduct is based on certain characteristics. The main law in this area is Title VII of
the 1964 Civil Rights Act. 8 It forbids workplace discrimination based on race, sex,
religion, disability, and ethnicity. These are called immutable characteristics. A
person cannot change them.
Title VII applies to most public and private employers. Employers with 15 or more
employees must follow it. The law states that employers have a duty to prevent
workplace discrimination, and to stop it if they know about it. Workplace
discrimination and harassment claims are often tied together.
Workplace harassment has always been a major issue for employers. The rise in
internet and email communications in the work environment adds extra
complications because they introduce a new way for harassers to communicate with
victims. Emails shared among employees that have offensive, explicit, or violent
content could lead to harassment claims. So could viewing offensive material from a
work computer screen in a public area. Employee-downloaded screensavers on an
organization’s computers can be a problem if they are offensive.
These activities raise legal liability when other employees are offended or feel
harassed. Employees also could make tort claims against an employer for intentional
infliction of emotional distress.
Employers use anti-harassment policies to help limit liability for workplace
harassment. Many organizations develop no-tolerance policies. They often use their
AUPs to forbid offensive use of IT resources as well. Many organizations do this.
However, the issue is serious enough that organizations should have a separate
anti-harassment policy. Although an anti-harassment policy is not specifically an IT
policy, the use of IT to harass another must be addressed in an anti-harassment
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.policy. In addition to forbidding in-person harassment, the policy should state that an
organization’s IT resources cannot be used to harass others.
Anti-harassment policies should contain the following elements:
Definition of harassment—It should define inappropriate conduct. This includes
in-person and electronic interactions that are threatening, intimidating, or offensive
in nature. Conduct is offensive if it is demeaning based on race, gender, national
origin, disability, religion, or politics.
Reporting—The organization must give employees a way to report harassment.
The reporting method must include alternatives if the alleged harasser is a victim’s
direct supervisor.
Investigation—An organization must investigate harassment complaints. They
must stop harassment when they have reasonable evidence that it is occurring.
No retaliation—The organization must make sure that it does not retaliate against
employees who file harassment complaints. Retaliation is an adverse employment
action made for a non-job-related reason. An organization may not take an
adverse employment action against an employee who files a harassment
complaint just because that employee filed a complaint.
Sanctions—The policy should state the consequences for violating the policy.
Information security personnel may participate in a harassment investigation and
investigate whether the organization’s IT resources hold evidence related to the
claim.
NOTE
In 2000, Dow Chemical Co. fired 74 employees for sending emails with pornography and violent images. It
also disciplined more than 400 additional employees for similar actions. Dow had policies that prohibited
employees from sending such emails.
The law allows victims to recover damages from their harassers. They also might
be able to recover damages from the harassers’ employers if they failed to respond
to harassment complaints. The law allows victims to receive compensatory
damages. They also can receive punitive damages in some cases, which can be
substantial.
Workplace Privacy and Monitoring Policies
Workplace privacy addresses an employee’s privacy rights at work. It is a
controversial issue, because employees do not want to have their activities
monitored. It can create feelings of distrust in a workplace.
Workplace privacy and monitoring is an area of law that is changing rapidly. For
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.the most part, however, U.S. employees have few privacy rights in their use of an
organization’s IT resources. An organization may monitor an employee’s work email
and internet use in many instances. Monitoring is usually allowed if there is a
legitimate business reason for it. Legitimate reasons to monitor email and internet
access include:
Assessing employee productivity
Monitoring operational use of IT resources
Monitoring policy compliance
Monitoring the use of the organization’s intellectual property
Investigating allegations of wrongdoing
Managing risk and protecting against legal liability
The information security department is often involved in workplace monitoring
activities. This department has the knowledge and ability to carry out an
organization’s desire to monitor IT resource use.
Does Cyber Monday Pose a Productivity Problem?
Black Friday, the day after the U.S. Thanksgiving holiday, is the traditional start of the winter holiday shopping
season. Stores and retailers often have sales on this day to encourage shoppers to visit stores and spend
money.
Cyber Monday, the first Monday after the Thanksgiving holiday, is the cyber-equivalent to Black Friday. Many
retailers noticed an increase in online sales on this day. They suggested that this was because employees
used their employer’s computers and high-speed connections to shop online when they returned to work after
the holiday. The National Retail Foundation reported that 83.3 million shoppers shopped online on Cyber
Monday in 2019. 9
How should an organization deal with Cyber Monday? What are the problems that it poses for productivity?
What are the problems that it poses for information security?
Employers usually win employee legal challenges against monitoring of business
email and internet use. To win these challenges, organizations must show that they
had a legitimate business reason for monitoring IT resources. They also must show
that they conducted the monitoring in a proper way.
Workplace privacy and monitoring policies are often combined together. They
inform employees that:
Their use of IT resources is not private.
Their use of IT resources is monitored.
Well-written policies give employees clear notice that they have no expectation of
privacy in an organization’s IT resources. They give an employee notice that their
use of IT resources will be monitored. They also might state why an organization
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.monitors its IT resources. Finally, they should state that an organization does not
waive its right to monitor IT resources even if it chooses not to do so all the time.
Data Retention and Destruction Policies
Data retention and destruction is a hot topic for many organizations. Data retention
policies state how data is controlled throughout its life cycle. Laws and
organizational policies help determine retention periods.
Data destruction policies state how data must be destroyed when it reaches
the end of its life cycle. Organizations must destroy paper and electronic data when
it is no longer needed. For electronic data, this means destroying it in primary and
backup storage systems.
For both types of data, it means destroying it in such a way that it cannot be
recovered. Data destruction policies are influenced by federal and state laws.
These policies help organizations cope with the large amounts of data that they
use and produce. Without these policies, records management can be difficult. An
organization might not know what types of data it has. It might not be able to find
data when it needs it for business reasons. It might use too many resources to store
data for longer than it must. Storage space for both paper and electronic data is a
valuable resource.
Even if an organization has information security controls in place, data is still a
vulnerability. It is vulnerable to external threats such as natural disaster or hackers. It
is also vulnerable to unintentional acts committed by employees. For instance,
employees can easily delete emails that they should keep. They also can save email
that should have been deleted because there was no business reason to retain it.
In order to create data retention and destruction policies for electronic data, an
organization must know how its IT resources work. They must know what data is
stored on its IT systems. They also must know how to retrieve that data from these
systems. Finally, they must know how to remove data from these systems.
Employee awareness is critical for successful data retention and destruction
policies. Employees need to be well educated on data retention requirements. They
also need to know how to properly file and maintain data that the organization must
retain. Finally, they need to understand proper destruction methods. This is very
important to avoid accidental disclosures of either paper-based or electronic media.
Data Retention Policies
Data retention policies define the types of data that an organization has. They also
address where data is stored and how it is protected. They specify how long different
types of data must be retained. These policies also are called document retention
policies.
Different types of data have different retention periods. This period is usually
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.driven by a combination of federal and state laws. It is also influenced by business
needs. Externally, many federal and state laws govern what organizations can do
with their data. These laws also state how long certain types of data must be kept.
For example, organizations that are subject to the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA) have to retain certain types of data for 6 years. 10
Laws are not the only factor affecting data retention. Organizations also have to
think about data retention if they become involved in a lawsuit. Most federal and
state courts have procedural rules that require organizations to maintain data if they
are party to a lawsuit. This rule might apply even before an actual lawsuit. For
example, an organization must retain paper and electronic data in situations where
litigation against it is reasonably anticipated. If an organization does not maintain this
data, it can be sanctioned by a court. Maintaining electronic data for this purpose
can be very difficult. There are special rules to follow to maintain electronic evidence
that might be used in a lawsuit. They are called E-discovery rules.
NOTE
State laws might require governmental agencies to retain financial or other types of data for different
lengths of time. This is to meet state auditing requirements or comply with open records laws.
In addition to legal requirements, organizations keep data for business purposes.
They keep it to conduct business, market products, or to recover from a disaster.
Organizations also preserve some types of data indefinitely. This might be because it
has legal, fiscal, research, or historical value.
Data retention policies help an organization manage these competing concerns.
A cross-functional team helps review and determine data retention requirements.
This team should include experts who understand the legal requirements. Experts
who know how the organization creates data should be on the team as well. The
team must include experts who know the organization’s IT systems. This team must
understand how the organization uses data and threats to that data.
Data retention policies need to include the following elements:
Types of organizational data
Where that data is stored
How that data is protected
Legal, business, historical, or other reason for keeping that data
How long the data should be retained
A data retention policy must be matched with a data destruction policy. An
organization must destroy data that it no longer must keep for business, archival, or
historical purposes.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.Data Destruction Policies
An organization creates data destruction policies to make sure that it destroys data
properly. An organization’s data destruction process must work hand-in-hand with a
data retention policy. The data destruction policy must include the following:
Identify data ready for destruction.
Specify proper destruction methods for different kinds of data or storage media.
Provide validation procedures to make sure data is properly destroyed.
Provide consequences for improper destruction.
Legal requirements can influence an organization’s data destruction policy. For
example, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) requires that paper documents
holding customer information be destroyed. 11 It also states that data must be
destroyed in such a way that it cannot be read or reconstructed. The law also
requires that electronic data be destroyed or completely erased. State laws also may
require organizations to destroy data in a certain way.
Data destruction policies must be consistently followed. This is important for
normal maintenance reasons. It is easy to destroy data when it is done on a regular
basis. Following a consistent process is critical if an organization is involved in a
lawsuit. It helps protect an organization from claims that it intentionally destroyed
evidence.
State Law Data Destruction Requirements
Some state laws require specific data destruction methods. The State of Indiana has this type of law. All
business in the state must follow the law requiring that they properly dispose of the unredacted personal
information of their customers. This information includes a customer’s Social Security number (SSN) or
certain types of financial account information. The law applies to both paper and electronic information.
The law requires that information be disposed of in a way that makes it unreadable or unusable. It says that
proper disposal methods include shredding, incinerating, mutilating, and erasing.
The state can fine a business that does not comply with the law, imposing fines that range from $500 to
$10,000 per violation. You can read Indiana’s data disposal law at
http://iga.in.gov/legislative/laws/2019/ic/titles/024#24-4-14.
Intellectual Property Policies
Intellectual property laws protect people’s or organizations’ ownership rights in their
creative ideas. It gives them the right to protect their ideas and profit from them.
These rights are exclusive to the owners of intellectual property. They can act
against people who violate these rights.
Intellectual property policies are very important for most organizations. There are
two main reasons why an organization should consider an intellectual property
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.policy. They are:
To protect its own intellectual property
To make sure that its employees respect the intellectual property rights of others
Organizations have large amounts of data that they use in carrying out their
business. This may include information protected by patents, copyrights, and
trademarks. It also can include information protected as a trade secret. Because it is
important to the viability of the organization, an organization must protect it.
An organization uses a policy to specify the intellectual property that it owns. As
in an AUP, so too in a policy governing the use of its intellectual property; an
organization will want to state its expectations:
That the organization’s intellectual property may be used only for authorized
business purposes
That the organization’s intellectual property may not be disclosed outside the
organization
Whether the intellectual property may be removed from the building, copied onto
removable media, or stored in cloud computing infrastructure
What the rules are for using the organization’s name or trademarks in
correspondence
There is an information security component to protecting the organization’s
intellectual property. For example, an organization’s electronic proprietary and trade
secret data must be secured against internal misuse. It also must be secured against
external attack.
The second reason for an intellectual property policy is to make sure that an
organization does not violate the rights of others. An organization can be held liable
for the infringing activities of its employees. For example, an organization will want to
make sure that its employees honor software licensing agreements. It will want to
make sure that employees do not use software without a valid license to do so. It
also must make sure that employees do not copy or distribute unauthorized copies
of software. The organization also will want to make sure that employees do not
share or download pirated software onto organizational computers.
Authentication and Password Policies
Authentication controls are among the most basic types of information security
controls that an organization can use to protect its IT resources. Authentication is
the process whereby a user proves his or her identity to access an IT resource.
Good authentication provides controlled access to an organization’s IT resources.
The user does this by presenting credentials. User credentials are used to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.access IT resources. They usually include a username and one of the following:
Something a user knows—This includes passwords, passphrases, and personal
identification numbers (PINs).
Something a user has—This includes tokens, smart cards, and digital
certificates.
Something a user is—This includes biometric data such as a fingerprint or retina
scan.
Organizations can implement authentication methods in many ways. Some ways are
more complicated and expensive than others. For example, biometric authentication
can be very expensive. Organizations also can choose to implement multifactor
authentication. This type of authentication requires employees to use two or more
different types of credentials to access IT resources.
Many organizations choose to implement passwords. This is because they can
easily implement them. They also are relatively inexpensive to use. Employees
generally are familiar with using passwords. Employees may be unfamiliar with other
types of authentication methods, such as using biometric data.
There are several problems with using passwords as the only authentication
method. An organization’s IT resources are vulnerable if a password is
compromised. A password can be compromised if an employee shares his or her
password. It also can be compromised through a phishing or dictionary attack.
NOTE
A dictionary attack tries to crack passwords by running through words or phrases listed in a dictionary.
Strong passwords help combat dictionary attacks.
Organizations implement authentication and password policies in an attempt to
reduce risk caused by password use. Sometimes these types of policies are stand-
alone policies, but they also can be included as a policy statement in an
organization’s main information security policy if it has one. These types of policies
state the user credential rules that employees must follow. Some policies state that
an organization’s IT department will never ask employees to share their passwords.
These policies often include password creation rules. For example, they may state
the number of characters that a password must have.
Would You Share Your Password for Chocolate?
Researchers at the University of Luxembourg studied whether or not people would be willing to exchange
their passwords for chocolate. In a fascinating social engineering study, they found that the timing of the gift
(before or after the request to share the password) and gender of the recipient were important. Men were
more likely to share their passwords if given chocolate right before being asked to share their passwords.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.About 30 percent of the participants in the study shared their passwords with the researchers. 12 The study
did not verify whether people were sharing valid passwords. It is possible that the survey results could be
influenced by chocolate lovers sharing fake passwords.
Other common password policy statements include:
Passwords should not be written down. If they must be written down, that paper
should be stored in a secured place.
Passwords must never be shared with anyone, including trusted colleagues,
friends, or family members.
Passwords must not contain dictionary words.
Passwords must not include a user’s name or parts of his or her name.
Employees must create strong passwords that meet the organization’s character
and complexity requirements.
Passwords expire after a certain period and must be changed.
New passwords must be different from the previous password or parts of the
previous password.
Passwords may not be reused for a specified period.
Passwords must not be inserted into email messages or other forms of electronic
communication.
Information security departments also can create their own policies for how
passwords should be used within IT resources. For instance, they might specify that
passwords should never be stored in IT resources as cleartext. These policies might
require that system authentication take place via encrypted channels. These also
might specify that a password cannot be displayed on screens as cleartext when an
employee enters it. This would help prevent shoulder surfing attacks. Where
possible, passwords should expire automatically, and employees should be
prompted to create new ones.
Security Awareness and Training
A 2016 survey asked about corporate information security policies. A total of 8,000
people participated in the survey. Of these, 88 percent of the employees surveyed
did not know about their organization’s information security policies. 13
An important part of any information security program is the training and
awareness component. This is because employees play a large role in meeting
information security goals. Employees often view information security training as a
waste of time. As one author writes, “Given a choice between dancing pigs and
security, users will pick dancing pigs every time.” 14
Employee behavior can help protect data and IT resources. It also can be
harmful. Employees who are not aware of their responsibilities pose a threat. They
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.may engage in risky online activities that could harm the organization’s IT resources.
Their actions also could disclose data. They can subject an organization to liability.
Training and awareness activities help reduce this threat.
A high-level awareness and training policy or policy statement lets employees
know that the BOD supports information security educational activities. Similar to
authentication policies, sometimes these types of policies are stand-alone policies,
or they can be included as a policy statement in an organization’s main information
security policy if it has one.
Creating an Information Security Awareness Program
Many organizations struggle with information security training and awareness. This includes the U.S. federal
government. FISMA requires federal agencies to implement security awareness training as part of their
overall information security programs.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) created guidance for training and awareness
activities. NIST Special Publication 800-50, “Building an Information Technology Security Awareness and
Training Program,” was published in 2003. It steps organizations through how to design and implement a
training and awareness program. It also discusses how to develop training material. Finally, it provides advice
on how to review the program’s effectiveness.
Any organization can use the NIST guidance to help create an information security awareness program.
An information security awareness and training policy or policy statement should
include the following elements:
Why security awareness and training are important
Who has overall responsibility for the policy
Who provides training and awareness activities
Which employees must take part in training activities
How often training must take place
What the consequences are for not participating in required training
BOD support of training activities is vital. It makes sure that employees understand
that training is important and makes them take it seriously.
A variety of training and awareness events are necessary to reach employees.
Organizations can use multiple training tools to help their employees know about
security policies.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.Case Studies and Examples
The following case study shows how the concepts discussed in this chapter are
used.
Acceptable Use Case Study
Autoliv is a seatbelt and airbag technology company. In 1998, Autoliv’s employee
handbook included several policies. It stated employee rules of conduct, including an
anti-harassment policy. It also included a computer AUP. Autoliv gave this handbook
to all of its employees.
Autoliv’s general rules of conduct stated:
“Each employee is required to be familiar with these rules and with additional rules
which apply to particular jobs and operations. In addition, each employee is
expected to maintain conduct consistent with job efficiency and accepted
standards of behavior for a business environment. Deviation from those standards
may be cause for disciplinary action.”
“Disciplinary action may be taken for violation of any single rule or combination of
rules, or for other improper conduct or unsatisfactory performance, and may
include any of the following actions: 1) Employee Discussion; 2) Notice of Caution;
3) Involuntary Suspension; 4) Termination.”
Autoliv’s anti-harassment policy stated that the company did not “tolerate or permit
illegal harassment or retaliation of any nature within our workforce.” Its computer
AUP prohibited non-business uses of company email. It also prohibited “conduct that
reflects unfavorably on the corporation.” 15
In 1998, Autoliv investigated employee use of its email system because of
system performance issues. It found that email use was causing the performance
issues and determined that the bulk of email use was not business related.
In June, Autoliv sent an email to all of its employees reminding them about
company policy. It said: “E-mail is to be used for business only. We do not wish to
‘police’ the e-mail system, so your cooperation would be appreciated. Please refrain
from sending/receiving these types of messages as it is interfering with legitimate
business e-mail.”
Autoliv sent another reminder email to its employees in September 1998. This
email warned that an employee could be fired for AUP violations.
In January 1999, Autoliv sent another email to its employees. This email stated
that it was a violation of the AUP to share chain letters, jokes and stories, and non-
business-related announcements. It also instructed employees to delete those types
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.of emails and not forward them.
A former employee complained to Autoliv that she had received harassing emails
from two current employees. Autoliv investigated. It learned that one employee had
sent 11 non-business email messages. These messages included jokes, photos, and
short videos that were sexually explicit. It found that another employee had sent 25
non-business email messages with similar content. Autoliv immediately fired both
employees.
NOTE
You can learn about the company at http://www.autoliv.com.
The fired employees filed for unemployment benefits. Autoliv contested this
request. A state can deny unemployment benefits if an employee is fired for “just
cause,” which means that there is a legally sufficient reason for firing an employee.
Autoliv said that it had just cause for firing the two employees.
At the unemployment hearing, the employees admitted that they had received
Autoliv’s handbook. They also stated that they knew about the anti-harassment
policy. They said they probably had received the three emails about email abuse, but
claimed they deleted these emails without reading them. They argued that their firing
was not “just” because they did not know they could be fired for sending non-
business emails.
The Utah Department of Workforce Services found that Autoliv did not have just
cause to fire the employees because the employees said they did not know that they
could be fired for their behavior. They were awarded benefits.
Autoliv appealed the agency’s decision to the Workforce Appeals Board. It lost its
appeal. Autoliv appealed the decision to the Utah Court of Appeals. Autoliv argued
again that the employees had plenty of knowledge that they could be fired for their
actions.
Think about the following:
What do you think the Utah Court of Appeals decided?
What facts support Autoliv’s argument that the employees had knowledge that
their conduct was unacceptable?
What facts support the employees’ argument that they did not have knowledge
that their conduct was unacceptable?
Do you think sending offensive emails is a “flagrant violation of a universal
standard of behavior”?
Could Autoliv make any changes to its general rules of conduct, anti-harassment
policy, or computer AUP that would make employee email responsibilities clear?
The Utah Court of Appeals reversed the decision of the Workforce Appeals Board. It
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.held that Autoliv did have just cause to fire the employees. In its opinion the court
stated: “There are two ways to establish that a claimant had knowledge: 1) the
employer must have provided a clear explanation of the expected behavior or a
written policy regarding the same; or 2) the conduct involved is a flagrant violation of
a universal standard of behavior.” 16
The court held that the employees’ email activities had violated a universal
standard of behavior. It wrote, “We conclude that in today’s workplace, the email
transmission of sexually explicit and offensive jokes, pictures, and videos constitutes
a flagrant violation of a universal standard of behavior.” 17
You can read the court’s opinion at http://caselaw.findlaw.com/ut-court-of-
appeals/1369016.html.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.CHAPTER SUMMARY
ISG provides strategic direction for an information security program.
Organizations must protect data in a way that supports their business goals.
They use high-level policies to state their information security goals. These
policies set forth employee responsibilities. An organization can address
information security issues in many different policies.
Standards, guidelines, and procedures are used to support policies. They
explain how employees meet policy goals. A training and awareness
program is a key part of an information security program. It helps make sure
that employees are aware of their duties.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Acceptable use policy (AUP)
Authentication
Baseline
Board of directors (BOD)
Chief information officer (CIO)
Chief information security officer (CISO)
Chief technology officer (CTO)
Data destruction policies
Data retention policies
Guidelines
Information security governance (ISG)
Information security management (ISM)
Multifactor authentication
Operational planning
Policy
Procedures
Stakeholders
Standards
Strategic planning
Tactical planning
User credentials
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.CHAPTER 13 ASSESSMENT
1. What is a policy?
A. An overall statement of information security scope and direction
B. A minimum threshold of information security controls that must be
implemented
C. A checklist of steps that must be completed to ensure information security
D. A technology-dependent statement of best practices
E. Recommended actions and operational guides
2. What is information security governance?
3. What type of policy would an organization use to forbid its employees from
using organizational email for personal use?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Privacy policy
Intellectual property policy
Anti-harassment policy
Acceptable use policy
Monitoring policy
4. What is software piracy?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Unauthorized copying of software
Unauthorized distribution of software
Unauthorized use of software properly purchased by an organization
All of these are correct.
None of these is correct.
5. What is information security management?
6. Employer monitoring of employee electronic communications can be a normal
term of employment if advance notice is given.
A. True
B. False
7. What is a standard?
8. Which law states requirements for federal agency information security
governance?
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
FISMA
FERPA
HIPAA
GLBA
FIPPS
9. A guideline is a list of mandatory activities that must be completed to achieve an
information security goal.
A. True
B. False
10. Which role is usually the most senior information technology official in an
organization?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
CFO
CISO
CTO
CIO
None of these is correct.
11. What is a procedure?
12. Which management layer has overall responsibility for information security
governance?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
CIO
CISO
Board of directors
Employees
Information security managers
13. What is the final step in the policy development process?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Maintenance and review
Management approval
Continued awareness activities
Communication to employees
Stakeholder review
14. What factors drive data retention policies?
A. Legal requirements
B. Business need for information
C. Historical need for information
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.D. Storage space requirements
E. All of these are correct.
15. What is a valid reason for allowing an information security policy exception?
A. The cost of implementing security policy is too high.
B. The cost of compliance with the policy is more than the cost of
noncompliance.
C. It is not technically feasible to implement the policy.
D. End users believe that the policy makes their work harder.
E. It is too difficult to implement the policy.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.ENDNOTES
1. New Vantage Partners, “Big Data and AI Executive Survey 2019,” January
2019. Available at http://newvantage.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/Big-
Data-Executive-Survey-2019-Findings-Updated-010219-1.pdf (accessed
February 17, 2020).
2. Ponemon Institute, “2019 Cost of Data Breach Study: Global Analysis,” undated.
Available at https://www.ibm.com/security/data-breach (accessed February 17,
2020).
3. International Organization for Standardization, “ISO/IEC 27001:2013,
Information Technology–Security Techniques–Information Security Management
Systems–Requirements,” 2013. Available at
https://www.iso.org/standard/54534.html (accessed July 25, 2020).
4. Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, Title III of the E-
Government Act of 2002, U.S. Code Vol. 44, sec. 3541 et seq. (2012).
5. U.S. Government Accountability Office, “High Risk Series: Substantial Efforts
Needed to Achieve Greater Progress on High Risk Areas,” March 2019.
Available at https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-19-157sp (accessed February
18, 2020).
6. Pew Research Center, “Mobile Technology and Home Broadband 2019,” June
2019. Available at https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2019/06/13/mobile-
technology-and-home-broadband-2019/ (accessed February 18, 2020).
7. American Management Association, “The Latest on Workplace Monitoring and
Surveillance,” April 8, 2019. Available at https://www.amanet.org/articles/the-
latest-on-workplace-monitoring-and-surveillance/ (accessed February 21, 2020).
8. Civil Rights Act of 1964, Pub. L. No. 88-352, 78 Stat. 241, codified as amended
in scattered sections throughout U.S. Code Vols. 2, 28, and 42 (2012).
9. National Retail Federation, “Thanksgiving Weekend Draws Nearly 190 Million
Shoppers, Spending Up 16 Percent,” December 3, 2019. Available at
https://nrf.com/media-center/press-releases/thanksgiving-draws-nearly-190-
million-shoppers (accessed February 21, 2020).
10. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), Pub. L. No.
104-191, codified at U.S. Code Vol. 42, sec. 1320d (2012).
11. Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (1999), Title V of the Financial Services Modernization
Act of 1999, Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338, codified at U.S. Code Vol. 15,
sec. 6801, et seq. (2012).
12. Happ, Christian, André Melzer, and Georges Steffgen, “Trick With Treat—
Reciprocity Increases the Willingness to Communicate Personal Data,” 2016.
Computers in Human Behavior. Available at
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/298187172_Trick_with_Treat_-
_Reciprocity_Increases_the_Willingness_to_Communicate_Personal_Data
(accessed February 20, 2020).
TechRepublic, “88% of Employees Have No Clue About Their Organization’s IT
Security Policies,” January 11, 2018. Available at
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/88-of-employees-have-no-clue-about-their-
organizations-it-security-policies/ (accessed February 20, 2020).
McGraw, Gary, and Ed Felten, Securing Java. New York, NY: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 1999. Also available at http://www.securingjava.com/ (accessed
February 20, 2020). View Chapter 1, part 7.
Autoliv ASP, Inc. v. Department of Workforce Services, 29 P.3d 7 (Utah Ct.
Appeals, 2001). All quoted statements are from this case.
Autoliv, 29 P.3d at 11.
Autoliv, 29 P.3d at 12–13.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:46.
