© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
CHAPTER
12
Criminal Law and Tort Law Issues in
Cyberspace
RIMINAL LAW REFERS to laws that the federal and state governments have
created to define unacceptable behavior. People who violate society’s
acceptable levels of behavior commit crimes. Criminal law deals with crimes,
whereas tort law refers to wrongful acts or harm for which an individual can sue the
person who caused the harm. Tort law governs disputes between individuals.
C
This chapter focuses on criminal and tort law issues that are unique to
cyberspace. In particular, it focuses on how people can use computers in cybercrime
activities. It also reviews how people use computers to commit torts. Sometimes
both criminal and tort law actions can be carried out against the same individual for
the same actions.
Chapter 12 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
What general criminal law concepts are
What common criminal law issues in cyberspace are
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.What general tort law concepts are
What common tort law issues in cyberspace are
What some case studies and examples are
Chapter 12 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Discuss common criminal law concepts
Describe the common criminal laws used to prosecute cybercrimes
Discuss common tort law concepts
Describe common tort principles used in cyberspace
Explain the difference between criminal and tort law
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.General Criminal Law Concepts
Cybercrimes, sometimes called computer crimes, involve situations where people
use the internet or computers as the medium for, or target of, criminal activity. Some
crimes, such as computer trespass, are prosecuted by extending existing criminal
laws to new situations that have arisen with new technology. Computer networks
facilitate these crimes. Other laws define new crimes that did not exist before
computers. The use of computers as a medium to commit crimes is growing.
Criminals also target computers and the data that they contain. Consider the
following:
A federal judge sentences a computer hacker to almost 5 years in prison for
violating the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA). The hacker created botnets
and sold access to them. Other attackers used the botnets to launch distributed
denial of service (DDoS) attacks.
A federal judge sentences a defendant to 2.5 years in prison for taking nude
videos of a news reporter and posting them to the internet. The judge also orders
the defendant to pay restitution to the victim.
The federal government charges three members of a hacking group with hijacking
the website of a telecommunications company. The company’s users could not
access the website for about 90 minutes.
A man is charged with cyberextortion. He is alleged to have attempted to extort a
life insurance company by threatening to send millions of computer spam
messages. Authorities say he wanted to damage the reputation of the insurance
company.
Crimes are instances of wrongdoing, or actions that harm society. They are
deviations from behavior that society, through its government, has defined as
unacceptable. Some crimes do not even need individual victims. Society is the
“victim” of the crime.
In simple terms, a crime is a violation of society’s code of conduct. Crime and the
concept of criminal law are very old. The Sumerian and Babylonian civilizations
included codes of conduct in their laws in 2100 B.C.E. Although these codes did not
resemble modern criminal law, they did define conduct that society decided was not
acceptable.
NOTE
Federal cases are titled “United States” versus the name of the defendant. This is because the
government of the United States is prosecuting the defendant for a crime. State cases are titled with the
name of the state versus the name of the defendant.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.As discussed in other chapters in this book, the American legal system is based
in large part on English common law. The U.S. Constitution is the main source of law
for the United States. The Constitution presumes that U.S. citizens will behave
lawfully. However, it includes provisions for how the government should handle
crimes in Article III. The Constitution even defines a specific crime. Article III, section
3, states that treason against the United States is a crime.
The U.S. Congress has passed laws defining federal crimes since the formation
of the government. Most states also have passed laws that have defined criminal
offenses. Because crimes are wrongs against society, the government pursues the
alleged wrongdoers. The federal government prosecutes violations of federal law,
whereas state governments prosecute violations of state laws.
Main Principles of Criminal Law
Criminal law is very different from civil law. Each system has different goals. Criminal
law aims to deter wrongful behavior through a combination of punishment and
rehabilitation of the offender. In contrast, civil law aims to right personal wrongs. It
does this by allowing people to sue to recover monetary compensation for injuries.
This section focuses on substantive criminal law. Substantive law describes a
person’s rights and responsibilities. It defines how people should relate to one
another and how they should relate to the government. Substantive law also is
known as subject matter law. Criminal law is only one of many categories of
substantive law. Contract law, business law, property law, and tort law are all
different types of substantive law.
NOTE
Attorneys often specialize in different subject matter areas. This is because of legal ethics rules that
require an attorney to be minimally competent. There are many areas of law. It is easier for attorneys to
meet ethical competency rules by focusing their practices in certain areas.
Substantive criminal law defines the conduct that constitutes a crime. It also
establishes penalties. Governments can specify criminal penalties in the same
statute that defines a crime. They also can list them in a separate penalty statute.
Type of Wrongful Conduct
Society recognizes two basic types of wrongful conduct. The first type is conduct or
acts that society universally agrees are wrong, morally repugnant, or dangerous to
other people. For example, almost all societies agree that murder and rape are
wrong. Mala in se is a Latin term that defines these types of wrongful conduct. Mala
in se means “evil in itself.” It describes conduct that is inherently wrong. Crimes that
are mala in se include murder, rape, kidnapping, robbery, theft, and arson.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Other types of conduct are mala prohibita. Mala prohibita is Latin for “wrong
because it is prohibited.” Society defines conduct that is mala prohibita. This conduct
is not inherently evil, but society prohibits it nonetheless. Crimes that are mala
prohibita include intellectual property violations (where prohibited by law, such as
federal copyright offenses), traffic law violations, and tax evasion. Many types of
cybercrimes are mala prohibita.
Crimes generally are classified into two groups, misdemeanors and felonies. The
two types of crimes are usually distinguishable by the way society punishes the
criminals who commit these crimes. Misdemeanors are less serious than felonies
and bear a less severe penalty. A misdemeanor is generally punishable by no more
than 1 year in prison. Felonies are more serious crimes. They are usually
punishable by more than a year in prison.
The levels of felonies and misdemeanors may vary from state to state. Some
states have different levels of misdemeanors and felonies. Language such as “first
degree” or “second degree” differentiates between different levels of crime. A state
can prosecute some types of crimes as either a misdemeanor or a felony depending
on the circumstances surrounding the crime.
Elements of a Crime
Criminal law is based on the principle that a guilty mind must accompany a criminal
act. Another principle is that criminal conduct harms society. In short, the American
system of law holds people responsible for their actions. A government must prove
the following elements to show that a crime has been committed:
Mens rea
Actus reus
Causation
To prove that a crime has been committed, a government must show that a person
acted with criminal intent. It must show that a person knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly engaged in criminal conduct. The Latin term mens rea means “guilty
mind.” Mens rea describes a person’s intent to commit a crime. Someone who lacks
mens rea cannot be held responsible for a crime.
Most criminal laws have language that specifies the amount of mens rea that a
person must have to be held responsible for a crime. For example, the Wisconsin
first-degree murder statute states: “Whoever causes the death of another human
being with intent to kill that person or another is guilty of a Class A felony.” 1 The
“intent to kill” portion of the statute describes the mens rea required to commit a
crime.
NOTE
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Some crimes do not require a particular mental state. For example, in most states, driving a car while
under the influence of drugs or alcohol is a crime regardless of the mental state of the driver.
Acts that are purely accidental do not meet the required mental showing for
criminal prosecution. However, that does not mean that the government prosecutes
only intentional actions. The government also can prosecute a person who acts
recklessly for criminal behavior.
A showing of recklessness means that a person acted in a manner that
consciously disregarded whether or not harm could result from the actions. For
example, the Wisconsin first-degree reckless homicide statute states: “Whoever
recklessly causes the death of another human being under circumstances which
show utter disregard for human life is guilty of a Class B felony.” 2 The “which show
utter disregard for human life” portion of the statute describes the mens rea required
to commit this crime.
Criminal statutes do not require governments to prove damages to prosecute a
defendant for a crime. However, governments can use the amount of harm that a
defendant causes to increase the level of the crime.
The actus reus is the wrongful act that constitutes a crime. Actus reus is the
Latin term for “guilty act.” To be a crime, the action must be voluntary. The actus reus
requires a physical act in furtherance of a crime. For example, the U.S. Supreme
Court held that a California law that punished people for being addicted to illegal
drugs violated the Constitution. 3 The California law made being “addicted” to drugs
the offense, even if the person who was addicted to drugs never used or possessed
drugs in the state. The law was challenged.
NOTE
In civil law, no showing of mental state, or mens rea, is required. Under civil law, wrongdoers are
responsible for their actions even if they did not intend to cause harm to another person.
In Robinson v. California (1962), the U.S. Supreme Court said that there were
many ways that the state could make certain acts related to drug use illegal.
However, simply making the status of being an addict illegal was a violation of the
Constitution. The case stands for the proposition that criminal activity requires a
voluntary, physical act.
A wrongful act also can include the failure to act when there is a duty to do so.
For example, parents have a duty to care for their children. A state may punish a
parent who fails to take care of his or her children when that failure rises to a level of
criminal conduct. For instance, in March 2010 the South Korean government
arrested a couple for child neglect. The government alleged that the couple’s video
game addiction led them to neglect their daughter, who starved to death. Tragically,
the video game that the couple was addicted to involved caring for a “virtual child” in
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.an online game. 4
Jurisdiction
Courts can hear only cases, or disputes, that are within their jurisdiction. Jurisdiction
describes the types of cases that a court has the authority to hear.
Jurisdiction can be described in several different ways. Jurisdiction can be used
to describe the function of a court. For example, trial courts generally have original
jurisdiction. This is the ability to conduct trials and to hear initial disputes between
parties. Appellate courts such as the U.S. Supreme Court have appellate jurisdiction.
They can only review decisions made by lower courts.
Jurisdiction also can describe the power of a court to hear a certain type of case
and make a binding decision in that case. Courts must have the proper jurisdiction to
make a valid judgment. To make a valid judgment, a court must have:
Subject matter jurisdiction
Personal jurisdiction
Subject matter jurisdiction is the power of a court to decide certain types of cases.
A court cannot decide cases where it has no subject matter jurisdiction. For example,
federal courts have jurisdiction only to decide cases about federal laws. This is
federal question jurisdiction. They also can decide certain types of disputes between
citizens of different states. This is diversity of citizenship jurisdiction. In contrast,
state courts can decide only cases about state laws or actions that occurred within
the geographic boundaries of the state.
FYI
In both state and federal courts, jurisdiction also looks at geographical and political boundaries. If a person
violates a federal law in Massachusetts, federal district courts in Massachusetts most likely have subject
matter jurisdiction to decide the case. If the person violated only state law, Massachusetts state courts
would have jurisdiction to decide the case.
Personal jurisdiction refers to a court’s ability to exercise power over a
particular defendant. If a court does not have personal jurisdiction over a defendant,
then it cannot impose a sentence on that person. Personal jurisdiction is important
for both criminal and civil cases. Typically, state courts can exercise personal
jurisdiction over people who commit acts within the state.
For criminal law, personal jurisdiction comes into play when criminal acts are
committed in several different states. It is also implicated when crimes affect
residents in many different states. The U.S. Supreme Court addressed this issue in
1911. 5 In Strassheim v. Daily, the Supreme Court used a “detrimental effects” test to
determine if a state could exercise jurisdiction over a person who committed crimes
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.outside of the state. The Court’s test had three parts:
Did the act occur outside the state?
Did the act produce detrimental effects within the state?
Were the acts the actual cause of detrimental effects within the state?
The test focuses on the defendant’s intent. It also looks at the consequences of the
defendant’s actions in a particular state. Under the detrimental effects test, a state
criminal court can exercise jurisdiction over a person who commits actions outside of
the state if those actions cause harm within the state.
Jurisdictional Issues for Cybercrime Cases
Jurisdiction is a particularly challenging issue concerning cybercrimes. Geographical boundaries do not limit
computer networks. Cybercriminals can easily commit crimes that span across many states and countries.
This makes it difficult for law enforcement to investigate these crimes. It is particularly difficult for law
enforcement to identify criminals and collect evidence across the globe. It also makes it difficult for courts to
hold cybercriminals responsible for their actions.
Nigerian scams highlight the jurisdiction issues in cybercrime cases. These types of scams also are called
“419 scams” or “advance fee fraud” schemes. (The “4-1-9” refers to the section of the Nigerian criminal code
that addresses fraud schemes.) This type of scam has been around since the early 1900s, when it was called
the Spanish Prisoner Con. Today many organizations refer to these types of scams as imposter scams—
where someone pretending to be someone else asks you to send money or share personal information.
Criminals originally conducted these scams via fax or mailed letters. They now conduct them with ease
through email and even text messages. In these types of scams, a person receives an email from someone
purporting to be an official of a foreign government or agency. The email writer usually offers large sums of
money in return for helping someone in trouble. In some cases, the email claims that the government has
made it difficult for the wealthy writer to cash a large check. (In the original scams the government referenced
was the Nigerian government. This is how the modern-day version of the imposter scam got this name.) The
writer asks the victim to advance the victim’s own funds to cover the check, and to help cash it. The writer
promises that the victim will get a hefty reward for his or her assistance.
A victim who advances funds soon learns that the check or underlying business transaction is fraudulent. The
money advanced is lost. People operating outside the United States who send targeted emails to U.S.
residents commit many of these types of crimes. In 2019, imposter scams featured prominently in the top
international fraud reports to the econsumer.gov international partnership. 8
These cases are extremely difficult to investigate and prosecute. How would a victim in Lafayette, Indiana, be
able to use the resources of local law enforcement to investigate a crime committed by a person who lives in
another country? Local police, prosecutors, and courts have limited power to investigate and prosecute these
types of international cases. State subpoenas and court orders do not usually apply across international
boundaries. These jurisdictional issues are becoming more common as internet crime grows.
The Supreme Court’s detrimental effects test used in the Strassheim case is a
common law rule. Many states have enacted legislation that codifies the detrimental
effects test. For example, Alaska law states that state courts have jurisdiction over
crimes that are “commenced outside the state but consummated inside.” 6
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.NOTE
The United States ratified the Convention on Cybercrime in August 2006.
Issues about jurisdiction are not just questions between the states. Personal
jurisdiction also can be an international issue. It is one of the main obstacles in
cybercrime cases because of the truly global nature of the internet. The Council of
Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which went into force in 2004, increases
cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of cybercrimes. Members of the
convention must adopt legislation to criminalize certain types of cyber-related
offenses and copyright infringement. They also agree to assist one another in
criminal investigations. Sixty-five nations have ratified it. 7
Criminal Procedure
Criminal procedure is the body of rules that govern how governments prosecute
people for crimes. These procedural rules make sure that criminal defendants
receive due process. Due process means that a defendant in a criminal case is
entitled to a fair and consistent process within the courts. The laws of criminal
procedure make sure that the government safeguards the defendant’s constitutional
rights. They also provide the government with a method for fairly prosecuting
defendants for their crimes.
FYI
A prosecutor is a government official who represents the government in criminal cases. Prosecutors
decide whether to charge a person with a crime and put on the court case against that person. U.S.
attorneys are federal prosecutors. States usually grant prosecutorial power to county governments. State
prosecuting attorneys might be called district attorneys, county attorneys, state’s attorneys, or simply
county prosecutors.
Most criminal procedure principles stem from the U.S. Constitution. This means
that many processes are similar among the states and the federal government.
However, some procedural rules are unique to each jurisdiction. The description
provided here is intentionally general and is meant to be a guide. The process also
can be different depending upon whether the crime committed is a misdemeanor or
felony.
A criminal case begins when a law enforcement agency begins an investigation.
Law enforcement agencies have certain rules that they must follow as they conduct
their investigation. When law enforcement officers complete their investigation, they
send the case to the prosecutor. A prosecutor then reviews the case and decides
whether to bring charges against the person that law enforcement identified as the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.perpetrator of the crime. Prosecutors have a lot of discretion in determining whether
to charge a person with a crime.
If a prosecutor decides to charge a person with a crime, he or she must file a
written document in court to start the criminal process. In some states, a prosecutor
may file a document called an information. An information specifies the charges
against the perpetrator of the crime. The prosecutor can exercise discretion when
filing an information.
In other states, defendants have a right to a grand jury indictment. A grand jury is
a panel of citizens who hear evidence presented by a prosecutor. The grand jury
determines if there is enough evidence to bring a person to trial for a crime. The
grand jury issues an indictment if it determines that the evidence is sufficient. An
indictment is the formal written criminal charges issued by a grand jury.
FYI
The Fifth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution requires that a federal grand jury issue charges for some
federal crimes. A defendant can waive the grand jury requirement. If a defendant waives the grand jury
requirement, then the federal prosecutor files an information to start criminal proceedings. Federal grand
juries contain between 16 and 23 people. The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure set this number. Grand
juries conduct their deliberations in secret. You can read the Handbook for Federal Grand Jurors at
https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/grand-handbook.pdf.
A criminal prosecution begins once a grand jury returns an indictment or after a
prosecutor files an information. At this point, the perpetrator of the crime becomes a
defendant. In a criminal case, the defendant is the person accused of a crime.
The next step in the criminal process is the initial hearing. This is sometimes
called an arraignment. The purpose of this hearing is to begin the formal court
process. At this hearing, a court must:
Inform the defendant about the charges.
Advise the defendant about his or her legal and constitutional rights.
During the initial hearting the defendant must enter a response to the charges, called
a plea. A defendant can enter a plea of guilty or not guilty. In some cases, she or he
also can enter a plea of nolo contendere, which is Latin for “I do not wish to
contend.” It is also called a plea of no contest. A no-contest plea is not a guilty plea.
However, it has the same effect as one. Most jurisdictions have limits on how and
when defendants can use this type of plea.
If a defendant enters a guilty plea, the court will set a date to sentence the
defendant. A 2018 study found that 90 percent of federal defendants plead guilty. 9
That same study found that only 2 percent of federal defendants have cases that go
to trial.
If the defendant enters a not-guilty plea, the court sets the case for trial. The U.S.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Constitution guarantees criminal defendants the right to a trial by jury. Article III of
the Constitution guarantees this right, and the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution
clarifies the scope of the right.
Under the Sixth Amendment, criminal defendants are entitled to a court-
appointed attorney if they cannot afford one on their own. Courts usually grant this
request only when a defendant faces a prison sentence. The Supreme Court case of
Gideon v. Wainwright (1963) held that a court must appoint an attorney to an
indigent defendant charged with a felony. 10 The defendant must prove that he or she
is indigent and cannot afford an attorney. The Supreme Court in the Gideon case
also held that a conviction is automatically reversed if a state denies a defendant the
right to counsel.
After the arraignment, the prosecution and the defendant’s attorneys will begin
the discovery process. Discovery is the process where the government gives the
defendant the evidence that it plans to use in the defendant’s trial. U.S. Supreme
Court cases have held that the government must disclose:
NOTE
The defendant’s right to an attorney arises when a criminal proceeding begins. A defendant may
voluntarily waive the right to counsel and represent himself or herself. A court must decide that a person is
mentally competent in order to do this. The court also must warn the person that there are dangers to self-
representation.
Any deals that the prosecution made with a witness (Giglio v. United States). 11
Any evidence it has that might help prove the defendant’s innocence (Brady v.
Maryland). 12
Courts strictly regulate the criminal discovery process. The rules for the process are
clear. A court has a wide range of actions it can take against parties that fail to
comply with discovery rules. A court can even dismiss the case if the prosecution
fails to comply with the rules of the process. Failure to turn over evidence that might
help prove the defendant’s innocence can cause a conviction to be overturned.
If a criminal case goes to trial, the government bears the burden of proving that
the defendant violated the law. In criminal cases, the government must prove the
defendant’s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. This is the highest burden of proof that
a prosecutor must meet. Reasonable doubt does not mean that a juror is 100
percent convinced of the defendant’s guilt. It does mean, however, that a juror must
be fully satisfied that the prosecution has eliminated any reasonable doubts about
the defendant’s guilt.
NOTE
The Sixth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution guarantees defendants a speedy trial. State criminal
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.procedure rules include time limits for all the steps in the criminal process. In Strunk v. United States
(1973), the U.S. Supreme Court held that a court must dismiss a criminal charge if a state violates the
defendant’s speedy trial rights. 13
The government has a high burden of proof in criminal cases because criminal
punishments infringe on a person’s fundamental rights. These rights include the right
to liberty, property, and life. Criminal penalties can include jail time, probation,
financial penalties, or even a death sentence. A court may impose these penalties
only if the government meets its high burden of proof.
A criminal case ends when a jury decides that a defendant is innocent or guilty. It
also ends if the jury cannot reach a decision. A hung jury is a jury that is unable to
reach a decision because the jurors disagree. A court will declare a mistrial if the jury
cannot reach a decision. In this case, the government may decide to refile the
charges and prosecute the defendant again.
A defendant who is convicted may appeal. Different rights allow a defendant to
appeal a ruling or conviction to a higher court. These rules are beyond the scope of
this discussion.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Common Criminal Laws Used in Cyberspace
A computer, or any electronic device, can play one of four roles in crime:
To commit a crime—Unauthorized access to data (hacking) and online fraud are
two examples where a computer is used to commit a crime.
To facilitate a crime— Cyberstalking, identity theft, phishing scams, and software
piracy are examples of crimes facilitated, or aided, by computers.
As a target of crime—Denial of service (DoS) and distributed denial of service
(DDoS) attacks, computer viruses, and communications sabotage are examples of
crimes where the computer itself is the target of the crime.
As a witness to crime—Computerized record-keeping systems may provide
evidence of an underlying crime or event.
Just because a computer or electronic device is involved in a crime does not make
that crime a cybercrime. For example, a person simply using a computer and printer
to create a forged document commits a criminal act. It is no different than if that
same person used a printing press and ink to forge the document. The crime is still a
forgery.
Cybercrimes are different. Cybercrimes, also called computer crimes, are crimes
that use computers as a medium to commit a crime or where the computer itself is
the target of the crime. Cyberstalking, identity theft, and phishing scams are
examples of crimes facilitated by computers. DoS and DDoS attacks, computer
viruses, and communications sabotage are examples of crimes where the computer
itself is the target of the crime. The distinction between the types of crime is subtle
but important.
Both the federal government and individual states have created several laws that
address cybercrime. This chapter talks primarily about federal cybercrime laws.
Federal laws will likely have the most impact on cybercrime. This is because
geography or state and national borders do not matter to cybercriminals. The
internet truly blurs these lines. A criminal can easily initiate a cybercrime in one state
and harm a victim in another. Also, because cybercrime statutes vary widely
between the states, federal laws may end up being more comprehensive.
NOTE
It is important to remember that many states criminalize the same behavior that federal cybercrime laws
address.
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (1984)
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Congress passed the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) in 1984. 14 It is the first
piece of federal legislation that identified computer crimes as distinct offenses. The
federal government used the CFAA in 1990 to prosecute the creator of the Morris
worm. This was the first prosecution under the CFAA. The CFAA provides both
criminal and civil penalties.
NOTE
The Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) is a partnership between the U.S. Federal Bureau of
Investigation (FBI) and the National White Collar Crime Center. Their 2019 Internet Crime Report showed
that the total loss linked to online fraud was $3.5 billion. 15 You can read the report at
https://pdf.ic3.gov/2019_IC3Report.pdf.
In enacting the CFAA, Congress chose to address a series of computer-related
offenses in a single statute. The CFAA limits federal jurisdiction to situations where
cybercrime is interstate in nature or when certain “protected computers” are the
target of crime.
The CFAA criminalizes the act of causing certain types of damage to a protected
computer without authorization or by exceeding authorized access. A protected
computer is any of the following:
A federal government computer
A financial institution computer
A computer used in interstate or foreign commerce 16
FYI
The CFAA does not define what access “without authorization” means. However, it does define what
“exceeding authorized access” means. 17 The failure to define the scope and limits of “without
authorization” is one of the biggest criticisms of the CFAA. Many CFAA cases boil down to questions of
access. There is a split among federal courts as to the meaning of authorized access under the CFAA. In
April 2020, the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to hear a CFAA case in its upcoming term. As of this writing,
no date for oral arguments has been set. The name of the case to watch is Van Buren v. United States.
You can follow the court’s docket at https://www.supremecourt.gov/docket/docketfiles/html/public/19-
783.html.
The CFAA treats protected computers as the victim of a crime. It addresses the
following types of criminal activity:
NOTE
Under the CFAA, essentially any computer that connects to the internet is a protected computer because
the internet facilitates commerce between different states.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Unauthorized access to a government computer
Unauthorized access to information on a protected computer
Unauthorized access to a protected computer that causes damage
Unauthorized access to a protected computer with an intent to defraud
Threatening to damage a protected computer
Unauthorized trafficking of passwords or other computer access information that
allows people to access other computers without authorization and with the intent
to defraud
Computer espionage
NOTE
Some sections of the CFAA require the government to show that the intruder caused damage. Under the
CFAA, damage is “any impairment to the integrity or availability of data, a program, a system, or
information.” 19
.
The CFAA does not just address intruders or outsider attacks on protected
computers. It also considers that insiders may exceed the access that they have
been granted in a protected computer system. Because these people already have
access to these systems, their access is not unauthorized. However, in some cases,
they commit a crime if they exceed their scope of authorized access. Under the
CFAA, a person exceeds authorized access when he or she accesses a computer
with authorization but uses that access to get or alter information that he or she is
not allowed to use or alter. 18
TABLE 12-1 summarizes the CFAA provisions and potential penalties. In all
instances, the penalties described are increased significantly if a defendant has a
previous CFAA conviction.
TABLE 12-1 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act Summary
CRIMINAL ACTIVITY
ACTION
GENERAL PENALTY
Unauthorized access A defendant can receive a fine, or up to 1
year in prison, or both.
Obtaining information from a
protected computer Unauthorized access
Access in excess of
authorized access A defendant can receive a fine, or up to 1
year in prison, or both.
The defendant also can be sentenced for
a felony and up to 5 years in prison if
aggravating factors exist. Repeat
offenders can receive a fine, or 10 years
in prison, or both.
Access of a protected
computer with intent to
defraud Unauthorized access
Access in excess of
authorized access A defendant can receive a fine, or up to 5
years in prison, or both.
Protected computer trespass
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Damage by Code Transmission:
A defendant can receive a fine, or 10
years in prison, or both. The defendant
also can receive 20 years in prison for
subsequent convictions or causing
damage leading to serious bodily injury. A
defendant can receive life imprisonment if
the offense causes or attempts to cause
death.
Reckless Damage:
A defendant can receive a fine, or 5 years
in prison, or both. Repeat offenders can
receive a fine, or 20 years in prison, or
both.
Damage and Loss:
A defendant can receive a fine, or 10
years in prison, or both.
Access to a protected
computer that causes damage Knowingly transmits a
program, incorporation, or
code that intentionally causes
damage
Intentional access that
recklessly causes damage
Intentional access that causes
damage and loss Threatening to damage a
computer Intent to extort A defendant can receive a fine, or up to 5
years in prison, or both.
Trafficking in passwords Knowing action, with intent to
defraud A defendant can receive a fine, or up to 1
year in prison, or both.
Repeat offenders can receive a fine, or
10 years in prison, or both.
Computer espionage Knowing access and willful
transmission of information
that could be used to injure
the U.S. or its interests A defendant can receive a fine, or up to
10 years in prison, or both.
Computer Trespass or Intrusion
The CFAA is the main federal law addressing cybercrime. In addition to the CFAA,
the federal government has some other laws that address computer trespass or
intrusion. These laws generally address computers that the U.S. government owns
or controls. Some laws, such as the CFAA, expand this definition to include
computers used in interstate commerce.
State Laws Against Computer Trespass
It is important to keep in mind that states also may have computer trespass statutes that prohibit
unauthorized access to computer systems or networks. Depending on the jurisdiction, these crimes have a
variety of names. In many states, the mere act of intentionally entering a computer system or network without
permission is a crime. In most jurisdictions, first-time computer trespass is a misdemeanor. The penalties for
computer trespass may escalate if a person is charged and convicted of more than one offense.
Most trespass statutes address only unauthorized access into a computer system. They stop short of
addressing actual computer tampering, access to information, or the injection of computer viruses or worms.
These types of crimes, which are malicious in nature, typically are addressed in other statutes.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Federal law addresses fraud and related activity in connection with access
devices. It outlaws the production, use, or sale of counterfeit or unauthorized access
devices. 20 Access devices include any item that can be used to obtain money,
goods, or things of value. They include items such as card, plate, code, account
number, electronic serial number, mobile identification number, personal
identification number, or other telecommunications services. A person who violates
this law commits a felony. He or she can be imprisoned for 10 to 20 years depending
upon the nature of the violation.
Theft of Information
Theft of information via computer networks is on the rise. Most of these crimes take
the form of theft of personal identifying information or financial information. Financial
gain is nearly always the motive for these crimes. The U.S. Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) announced that fraud and identity theft were number one and
two, respectively, on its list of top three consumer complaints for 2019. 21
The federal Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act (1998) makes identity
theft a federal crime. 22 The law makes it illegal for anyone to knowingly transfer or
use another person’s identification with the intent to commit a crime. Under the law,
an identification document is any document made or issued by the federal or a state
government. Identifying information includes items you may be familiar with as
personally identifiable information, such as name, Social Security number (SSN),
and driver’s license number. It also includes:
Unique biometric data, such as fingerprint, voice print, retina or iris image, or other
unique physical representation
Unique electronic identification number, address, or routing code
Electronic serial number or any other number or signal that identifies a specific
telecommunications device or account
Any other piece of information that may be used to identify a specific person
If a person violates the law, she or he is subject to fines and criminal penalties of
up to 15 years in prison. This period increases to 30 years in special circumstances,
such as where identity theft is used to facilitate terrorism. Violators also must give
any personal property used to commit identity theft crimes to the government. The
U.S. Secret Service, FBI, U.S. Postal Inspection Service, and Social Security
Administration’s Office of the Inspector General all have the power to investigate
crimes committed under this law.
NOTE
The FTC’s identity theft website provides useful information about preventing identity theft. You can read
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.more at https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/topics/identity-theft.
Interception of Communications Laws
Federal laws that address the illegal interception of communications forbid the use of
eavesdropping technologies without a court order. Communications covered by the
statutes include email, radio communications, electronic communications, data
transmission, and telephone calls. The federal Wiretap Act (1968, amended)
governs real-time interception of the contents of a communication. 23 It does not apply
to transmission information. The Act forbids the real-time interception of any wire,
oral, or electronic communication. Communications covered by the Act include
email, radio communications, data transmissions, and telephone calls. A person who
violates the Act can be fined or imprisoned for up to 5 years, or both.
NOTE
The Pen Register and Trap and Trace Statute governs access to the real-time interception of headers,
logs, and other transmission information. 24
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act (ECPA; 1986) governs access to
stored electronic communications. 25 This includes access to the contents of the
communication and the headers and other transmission information. The ECPA is an
amendment to the original Wiretap Act.
The ECPA governs access to the contents of stored communications, as well as
access to transmission data about the communications. Under the ECPA, no one
may access the contents of these communications unless it is allowed somewhere
else in the ECPA. A person who violates the Act can be fined or imprisoned for up to
5 years, or both. Repeat offenders can be imprisoned up to 10 years.
Spam and Phishing Laws
Congress created the Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and
Marketing (CAN-SPAM) Act in 2003. 26 The Act covers unsolicited commercial email
messages known as spam. Spam is unsolicited electronic junk mail that a user may
receive. Spam is a nuisance to the recipient. The CAN-SPAM Act has both civil and
criminal provisions.
The CAN-SPAM Act requires commercial email senders to meet certain
requirements. Commercial messages are messages with content that advertises or
promotes a product or service. The Act also forbids sending sexually explicit email
unless it has a label or marking that identifies it as explicit. 27
Commercial email message senders must meet the following CAN-SPAM
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.requirements:
Do not use false or misleading header information.
Do not use deceptive subject lines.
Identify the email message as a commercial advertisement.
Include a valid physical postal address.
Inform message recipients how to opt-out of future email messages.
Promptly process opt-out requests.
Monitor the actions of third parties that advertise on the sender’s behalf. 28
NOTE
The FTC helps businesses understand the CAN-SPAM Act. You can view their business compliance guide
at https://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/guidance/can-spam-act-compliance-guide-business.
The FTC enforces the civil provisions of the CAN-SPAM Act. Violations of the Act are
enforced by the FTC in the same way that it enforces unfair or deceptive trade
practices. 29 The FTC also has promulgated rules for businesses to follow. The FTC
completed its first review of the CAN-SPAM Act in 2019 and determined that it would
make no changes to the rule because of its benefit to consumers. 30
The CAN-SPAM Act also has criminal provisions. It includes penalties for:
Accessing another person’s computer without permission to send spam
Using false information to register for multiple email accounts or domain names
Relaying or retransmitting spam messages through a computer to mislead others
about the origin of the email
Harvesting email addresses or generating them through a dictionary attack
Taking advantage of open relays or open proxies without permission to send
spam 31
The U.S. Department of Justice enforces the criminal provisions of the CAN-SPAM
Act. Criminal penalties include fines or imprisonment of up to 5 years. The first
conviction under the CAN-SPAM Act occurred in 2004. In that case, the defendant
searched for unprotected wireless access hotspots and exploited them to send spam
messages that advertised pornographic websites. Eventually, the court sentenced
the defendant to 3 years’ probation and 6 months of home detention. He also had to
pay a $10,000 fine. 32
NOTE
The criminal provisions of the CAN-SPAM Act allow the U.S. government to prosecute hackers who use
email. 33
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.FYI
Spam email messages also can be phishing attempts. There is no federal anti-phishing law. However,
phishing attacks can be prosecuted under several different federal laws. This includes many of the laws
already discussed in this section. For example, if the phishing attackers are attempting to steal personal
information, they may be committing identity theft. In that case, the federal Identity Theft and Assumption
Deterrence Act would apply. They also may be committing computer fraud or access-device fraud. Some
phishing attacks also can be prosecuted under the CAN-SPAM Act.
If a phishing attack includes malicious activity, such as spreading computer viruses, then the CFAA would
apply. Phishing scams also can violate state laws on fraud and identity theft.
Cybersquatting
Cybersquatting is the bad-faith registration of a domain name that is a registered
trademark or trade name of another entity. Congress created the Anti-
Cybersquatting Consumer Protection Act (ACPA) in 1999. 34 It is designed to stop
people from registering domain names that are trademarks that belong to other
entities.
The ACPA allows entities to sue cybersquatters. To prove such a case, the
plaintiff must show that the cybersquatter registered the trademark in bad faith with
the intent to profit from the registration. The ACPA includes nine factors that help a
court determine bad faith. 35 Those factors are:
A person’s intellectual property rights in the domain name
Whether the domain name consists of the legal name of the person
The person’s prior use of the domain name in connection with the sale of goods or
services
The person’s noncommercial or fair use of the domain name
The person’s intent to divert consumers from the mark owner’s own website
The person’s offer to sell the domain name without having used the domain name
for the sale of goods or services
Whether the person gave false or misleading contact information when registering
the domain name
Whether the person registered multiple domain names that are identical or
confusingly similar to marks owned by others
Whether the mark incorporated in the domain name is famous and distinctive
Under the law, a plaintiff can recover damages and ask the court to issue an
injunction that stops the cybersquatter from using the contested domain name.
Courts also can award the contested domain name to the winning party.
Malicious Acts
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Common malicious information security acts include malware, worms, viruses, and
Trojan horses. For the most part, the federal government can prosecute these types
of activities under the CFAA.
Under the CFAA, the intentional transmission of malware, viruses, or worms that
damage a protected computer is a felony. Remember that for the CFAA, almost any
computer connected to the internet is a protected computer. The government can
charge people who violate this provision of the CFAA with a felony that can be
punished with up to 10 years in prison.
Cyberstalking, the use of the internet to stalk another person in a threatening
way, is also a malicious act. Cyberstalkers could use email, instant messages, blogs,
social networking platforms, and even entire websites to target their victims.
Cyberstalking is sometimes also referred to as cyberharassment.
Many traditional state laws on stalking and harassment have been updated to
include language about cyberstalking. Similar to many other cybercrimes,
cyberstalking often crosses state borders. At the federal level, cyberstalking is
prohibited under several different laws:
The Telephone Harassment Act—Makes it illegal to use the internet to transmit
any message to harass or threaten another person. 36
The Interstate Stalking and Prevention Act—Makes it illegal for anyone who
travels across states to use any interactive computer service to cause substantial
emotional distress. 37
The Interstate Communications Act—Makes it illegal to transmit in interstate
commerce any threat to injure another person. 38
Cyberbullying is closely related to cyberstalking. The distinction is that cyberbullying
is harassment that takes place between school-aged children. 39 Depending on the
situation, state cyberbullying or cyberstalking laws tend to apply most in these
cyberharassment situations. Currently, no federal law directly addresses
cyberbullying. The federal government has attempted to expand the use of the CFAA
into the area of cyberbullying with little success.
In 2008, the Department of Justice indicted Lori Drew for violating the CFAA. 40
The government argued that her activities on a social networking service exceeded
her authorization in the use of a protected computer. She exceeded her authorized
access by using the site in excess of the use authorized by the site’s terms of
service agreement. A jury found her guilty of a misdemeanor CFAA violation. That
conviction was set aside in August 2009. The judge found that there were several
problems in applying the CFAA to the case. 41 The government did not appeal the
judge’s reversal. Many federal courts have since found that violating the terms of
service agreement for a website is not a CFAA violation.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.NOTE
Learn more about preventing cyberbullying at www.stopbullying.gov.
Well-Known Cybercrimes
The list of well-known cybercrimes changes every day. The CFAA, the “go-to” act for
federal prosecution of cybercrime, is very broad, and almost any type of internet-
related crime involving computers will fall within its scope. Prosecutors often include
CFAA charges with other federal criminal charges if a computer is involved in the
commission of a crime.
Some cybercrimes are well known because they were “first.” For example, the
Morris worm was one of the first computer worms on the internet. At the time, it
infected and overwhelmed many government systems. The creator of the worm was
the first person charged with violating the CFAA. 42
The CFAA also was used to prosecute the creator of the Melissa virus. 43 When it
was released, the Melissa virus was one of the fastest-moving and most destructive
viruses. David Smith created and distributed the Melissa virus in 1999. The virus
caused more than $80 million in damage. He was sentenced to 20 months in federal
prison in May 2002. He also was fined $5,000.
NOTE
You can learn how the federal government is prosecuting cybercrime by visiting the Department of Justice
Computer Crime and Intellectual Property web page. The “Press Releases” page lists recent cybercrime
prosecutions. The web page is available at http://www.justice.gov/criminal/cybercrime/.
Other cybercrimes are well known because they are among the biggest or the
perpetrators have received notable punishments. For instance, one of the hackers in
the TJX Companies, Inc. case received the harshest-ever sentence for a hacking
case in March 2010. The federal government had charged him with violating the
CFAA, federal laws related to access device fraud, and the Identity Theft and
Assumption Deterrence Act. The hacker, Albert Gonzalez, was sentenced to 20
years in prison. He was also fined $250,000. 44
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.General Tort Law Concepts
A tort is some sort of wrongful act or harm that injures a person. A person who is
injured by a tort may sue the wrongdoer for damages. The word tort is from the Latin
word tortus, which means wrong or twisted.
In the United States, tort law has evolved from English common law. Many states
give either common law or statutory recognition to most torts. When states enact tort
laws, they typically are trying to expand or limit common law tort liability. Common
law tort principles are similar among the states. The American Law Institute has
prepared a review of tort law. The Restatement (Second) of the Law of Torts
summarizes the common law tort rules.
NOTE
A tortfeasor is a person who commits a tort. In this discussion, a person charged with committing a tort is
called a defendant. A plaintiff is the person allegedly injured by the defendant’s actions.
Tort law is based on the premise that people should go about their daily business
in a way that does not harm other people or their property. So long as people are
acting reasonably, this is easy to accomplish. Tort law allows people a way to
recover for their injuries if another person does not act reasonably.
NOTE
Tortious conduct is wrongful conduct. It is conduct that is unreasonable given the situation.
Tort law uses the reasonable person standard to determine whether a person
acts appropriately. Courts use this standard to determine if a person acts reasonably
in response to a particular situation. This standard determines whether conduct is
tortious.
There are three types of torts. They are:
Strict liability torts
Negligent torts
Intentional torts
This section will briefly describe all three types of torts. However, you should keep in
mind that most torts involving computers probably will fall under the intentional torts
category.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Strict Liability Torts
Strict liability is a legal concept that means that people can be held responsible for
their actions even if they did not intend to cause harm to another person. Several
areas of law apply this concept.
In tort law, a person is held liable for strict liability torts regardless of intent or
negligence. Courts usually impose strict liability theories in unreasonably dangerous
situations. These are situations where even a reasonable person cannot prevent
risk. The main reason for imposing strict liability is to discourage unreasonably risky
behavior.
The classic example of a strict liability tort is when a person keeps wild animals
as pets. Wild animals are inherently dangerous. Even if the owner of the animal
takes reasonable precautions, there is still a risk to the public if the animal escapes.
If an animal were to escape and injure a person, courts would hold the owner liable
for any damages that the animal caused. Courts hold the owner liable even if the
owner takes every precaution available to ensure safety.
In a tort based on strict liability, the plaintiff must show that the defendant
engaged in unreasonably dangerous activities. The plaintiff also must show that he
or she was harmed. The defendant bears the burden of proving that the activities
were not unreasonably dangerous.
Negligence Torts
Negligence torts are based on the premise that a person is liable for any injuries or
harm that are the foreseeable consequences of his or her actions. To prove a
negligence-based tort, a plaintiff must show that:
The defendant owed the plaintiff a duty of due care.
The defendant breached his or her duty.
The breach of duty caused the plaintiff’s foreseeable injuries.
The plaintiff was damaged.
Plaintiffs must prove that the defendant owed them a duty of due care. A duty of
due care is a person’s obligation to avoid acts or omissions that can harm others.
The level of duty that one person owes to another is based on the reasonable
person standard, a legal concept used to describe how an ordinary person would
think and act. The plaintiff will present evidence on what a reasonable person in a
similar circumstance would have done. This evidence shows the level of care that
the defendant owes the plaintiff.
There are special duty of due care rules for people in learned occupations,
professions where special training and skill are required. Under the law, people in
these occupations are held to a higher standard of care that is reasonable for
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.members of that profession. For example, a lawyer’s duty of due care toward his or
her clients is based on a reasonable lawyer standard. Doctors, architects, engineers,
and airplane pilots are held to reasonableness standards based on their professions.
NOTE
The standard of care for professionals in learned occupations is important in professional malpractice
cases.
The plaintiff also must show that the defendant breached a duty of due care. That
is, the plaintiff must prove that the defendant’s behavior fell below what a reasonable
person would have done in the same situation. The plaintiff will compare the
defendant’s behavior against the evidence that was used to show that the defendant
had a duty of due care. The plaintiff can show that the defendant breached his or her
duty by showing that the defendant acted in a way that was unreasonable given the
situation and the defendant’s duty.
NOTE
A plaintiff also can prove a breach of the duty of due care by showing that the defendant failed to take a
required action. This is called an omission.
For example, a plaintiff may be able to establish that people have a duty to keep
their sidewalks free from ice in the wintertime. To prove that the defendant breached
this duty, the plaintiff would present evidence that the defendant did not shovel his or
her sidewalks. The plaintiff also would have to show that the defendant’s failure to
keep the sidewalks clear injured the plaintiff.
The Reasonable Information Security Professional
Torts based on a professional’s duty to provide competent services are among the oldest negligence torts. Is
an information security professional a member of a learned occupation? Will information security
professionals be held to a “reasonable security professional” standard when advising clients? There is some
argument that this could be the case sometime in the future.
Information security as a career path continues to evolve. Many information security professionals are highly
educated individuals who are experts in their fields. Most of them have certifications in various technical
aspects of information security. Many computing vendors offer technology-specific security certifications for
their products.
Several independent organizations offer security-related certifications as well. The International Information
Systems Security Certification Consortium (ISC) 2 grants certifications to many information security
professionals. This organization certifies that information security professionals have varying levels of
experience and knowledge in the field. You can learn about (ISC) 2 at http://www.isc2.org/.
The Global Information Assurance Certification (GIAC) program also grants information security certifications.
It offers special certifications in areas such as audit, intrusion detection, and operating system security. These
certifications test technical skills. Many information security professionals hold GIAC certifications. You can
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.learn about GIAC at http://www.giac.org/.
Both (ISC) 2 and GIAC require certificate holders to follow a code of ethics. Each group has a code that
defines acceptable levels of behavior for certificate holders. Both codes require certificate holders to act
responsibly when giving information security advice. These organizations also require certificate holders to
engage in activities that keep their information security skills up to date.
As of this writing, no U.S. court has recognized a professional duty for information security professionals.
Think about whether information security certifications and the ethical obligations that they sometimes require
could be used to show that information security professionals are part of a learned profession. Could this
change how information security professionals help their clients secure information systems?
The plaintiff also must show that the defendant’s breach caused the plaintiff’s
foreseeable injuries. Often courts use the “but for” test to meet this requirement.
Would the plaintiff’s injuries have occurred “but for” the defendant’s actions? Once it
is established that the defendant caused the plaintiff’s injuries, courts review whether
those injuries are compensable.
The law recognizes that there are some instances where the defendant is no
longer responsible for the plaintiff’s injuries. This happens when the plaintiff’s injuries
are not foreseeable. The famous case that explored this concept is Palsgraf v. Long
Island Railroad (1928). 45
In the Palsgraf case, a passenger was running toward a moving train. Train
employees tried to help the passenger board the train. As they helped him, they
bumped a package from his arms that contained fireworks. The fireworks exploded
on the train tracks and caused a scale on the train platform to topple over. When it
fell, it injured Mrs. Palsgraf. She sued the railroad for her injuries.
The New York Court of Appeals decided the case. The court held that the
plaintiff’s injuries were not a foreseeable result of the actions of the railroad’s
employees. The court also held that the defendant had no duty to the plaintiff. The
duty was owed to the passenger that the train employees were trying to help onto
the train. Because there was no duty owed to the plaintiff, there could be no liability.
NOTE
In New York, the Court of Appeals is the state’s highest court.
The Palsgraf case has come to stand for the rule that a defendant has no duty of
due care to an unforeseen plaintiff for unforeseeable injuries. If there is no duty to an
unforeseen plaintiff, then there is no negligence. This means that the relationship
between the defendant’s act or omissions and the plaintiff’s injuries must have
proximate or legal cause; that is, that the plaintiff’s injuries must be the natural and
foreseeable results of the defendant’s negligence.
NOTE
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.In a tort case, damages can be economic or non-economic. Economic damages are damages that have
monetary value. They include compensation for medical bills, lost wages, and damage to property. Non-
economic damages are harder to prove. They include compensation for items such as pain and suffering,
or loss of companionship.
Once the plaintiff proves that the defendant committed a negligent act, the
plaintiff must prove that he or she suffered an injury and is entitled to damages. A
court awards damages in a tort case in an attempt to make a plaintiff whole. These
are called compensatory damages. Compensatory damages try to place the plaintiff
in the same position that he or she would have been in had no tortious act occurred.
This is the primary goal of tort lawsuits.
A court does not usually award punitive damages in a negligent tort case.
However, it may award punitive damages if the defendant’s actions are grossly
negligent. This does not happen often, though. Many states have placed limits on
the amount of punitive damages that a court or jury can award in a tort lawsuit.
There are some defenses to negligence torts a defendant can use to help escape
or limit liability. A defendant has the burden of proving her or his defenses. The three
most common defenses are:
Assumption of risk—The plaintiff had assumed the risk of the defendant’s
actions and any injuries resulting from those actions. If the defendant proves
assumption of risk, he or she has no liability to the plaintiff.
Contributory negligence—The plaintiff should recover nothing because his or
her own actions also contributed to his or her own injuries. If the defendant proves
contributory negligence, he or she has no liability to the plaintiff. Only a few
jurisdictions follow this rule because it is very harsh.
Comparative negligence—The plaintiff should recover only a pro rata share of
damages because his or her own actions also contributed to his or her injuries. In
most jurisdictions, a plaintiff less than 50 percent at fault can recover a pro rata
share of damages based on the defendant’s level of fault.
Intentional Torts
Intentional torts occur when the defendant intended to commit the tort. Intentional
torts often share many common elements with a crime. It helps to remember that
civil actions address torts and criminal actions address crimes. The same action can
be both a wrong against society (a crime) and a wrong against an individual (a tort).
The classic example of an intentional tort is battery. Battery is harmful or
offensive contact with another person. The battery tort occurs when the defendant
intentionally causes harmful contact with the plaintiff.
NOTE
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Most of the torts associated with computers and cyberspace are intentional torts. These occur when the
defendant uses a computer or takes some action involving a computer, intentionally, to harm the plaintiff.
The most common defense to an intentional tort is that the plaintiff consented to
the wrongful action. A defendant must prove that the plaintiff consented. A defendant
can use the plaintiff’s words or actions as evidence to prove consent.
Civil Procedure
A plaintiff must sue a defendant in a civil lawsuit to recover for tort injuries. Civil
procedure is the body of rules that govern how courts conduct civil cases. This
section provides more detail on the civil trial process. One thing to keep in mind is
that the laws of civil procedure vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. The federal and
state governments all have different civil procedure rules. The description provided
here is intentionally general.
A civil action begins when the plaintiff files a complaint with a court. A plaintiff
uses a complaint to tell his or her story. The plaintiff states how he or she was injured
and asks the court to make him or her whole. A complaint must contain “a short and
plain statement of the claim showing that the pleader is entitled to relief.” 46 It also
must show that the court has jurisdiction to hear the case. The plaintiff also must
specify the relief demanded. In a tort case, the plaintiff typically wishes to receive
money damages. The damages compensate the plaintiff for any injuries.
NOTE
In civil procedure, the plaintiff is the party that brings the lawsuit. The defendant is the party that defends
against the lawsuit. In some jurisdictions, and for some types of cases, the plaintiff could be called the
petitioner. The defendant could be called the respondent.
The plaintiff must file a complaint within a certain period, called the statute of
limitations, after the claimed injury. For example, in Indiana, the statute of
limitations for most tort actions is 2 years. 47 The plaintiff must sue the defendant
within 2 years of being injured by the defendant. Not all states have the same time
limits, however. For example, in Montana, the statute of limitations for most tort
actions based on negligent conduct is 3 years. 48
Service of process refers to the procedure that delivers the complaint and a
summons to the defendant. This process makes the defendant aware that the
plaintiff has filed a lawsuit. Certain formalities must be followed to serve a complaint
and summons on a defendant. For the most part, the complaint and summons are
delivered physically to the defendant. This is to assure the court that the defendant
received proper notice of the lawsuit.
The defendant must respond to the complaint after receiving it. That response is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.called an answer. All jurisdictions have time limits that a defendant must follow when
answering the complaint. Under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, a defendant
must file his or her answer within 20 days after receiving the complaint. 49 A court can
allow a defendant more time to answer if necessary.
A defendant must respond to each claim in the plaintiff’s complaint. He or she
can admit to or deny the claims. The defendant must also state her or his defenses
to each claim. The answer is the defendant’s opportunity to tell her or his side of the
story.
NOTE
A defendant also can raise counterclaims in his or her answer. These are the defendant’s claims against
the plaintiff. The defendant also can raise cross-claims. These are the defendant’s claims against another
party to hold that third party responsible for the plaintiff’s injuries.
A defendant also can raise defenses to the plaintiff’s complaint. Some of these
defenses are absolute. The court must dismiss the plaintiff’s lawsuit if the defendant
proves the defense. For example, the defendant can question the court’s jurisdiction.
If the court does not have jurisdiction over the matter, then it must dismiss the
lawsuit. A defendant also can argue that the plaintiff does not have a legal basis for
the claim. The court must dismiss the lawsuit if there is no legal basis for the
plaintiff’s claim.
After the complaint and answer, the plaintiff and defendant’s attorneys will begin
the discovery process. This is the period of the civil lawsuit where the parties share
information with one another. Unlike the criminal discovery process, there are few
affirmative disclosure rules in the civil discovery process. The parties must disclose
their witnesses to one another. They also must provide each other with a list of
documents that they have in their possession that are related to their claims and
defenses. The documents that each party must disclose include a listing of
documents stored in an electronic form.
After these general disclosures, it is up to each party to ask for information that is
relevant to the case. The parties use various procedural rules to ask each other for
information and documents. The process can get very complicated. It also can get
very expensive. Sometimes the parties will ask the court to intervene in the
discovery process. This happens when the parties dispute whether some types of
information must be disclosed.
For example, a defendant may not want to disclose trade secret information
through the discovery process, even if it is relevant to the case. This is because
documents filed in a court case become public records. This includes documents
exchanged during the discovery process and then used as evidence at trial. The
defendant does not want to lose trade secret protection. The defendant could lose
that protection if the information is available to the public or if it is shared with the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.other party’s legal team. In this instance, the defendant could ask the court to issue a
protective order. This type of order requires the parties to keep certain information
secret. It helps protect the defendant’s trade secrets.
After the discovery process ends, the parties either settle their lawsuits or
proceed to trial. If a tort case goes to trial, the plaintiff must prove all the elements of
his or her claim. He or she must prove the case through a preponderance of the
evidence. This is a lower standard of proof than in criminal cases. A civil trial ends
with the court or jury’s decision on the case. Parties may appeal an adverse ruling at
the trial court level. Either party may appeal a ruling to a higher court through several
different procedural rules. These rules are outside of the scope of this chapter.
NOTE
Some civil cases, called bench trials, are tried in front of a judge alone. Bench trials are unusual in tort
cases.
Electronic Discovery
For the parties in a lawsuit, electronic data can be important evidence. This is especially true because many
parties and witnesses store their data in an electronic format only. The introduction of electronic-format
evidence and record-keeping systems caused some problems for the legal system. These problems were
acute in the discovery phase of lawsuits, where parties would engage in expensive fights over the production
of electronic information.
Electronic discovery deals with information stored in an electronic format. It is also known as E-discovery.
Before 2006, courts decided E-discovery issues on a case-by-case basis under standard discovery rules.
The most famous case for E-discovery issues is Zubulake v. UBS Warburg, LLC. 50 The U.S. District Court for
the Southern District of New York decided this case.
There are actually several Zubulake decisions regarding electronic discovery. They stated the first real rules
for parties to follow regarding electronic evidence. The rules related to the duty to preserve evidence, the
duty to monitor compliance with preservation decisions, and the costs of providing electronic data.
In 2006, the U.S. Supreme Court amended the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure to clarify how parties should
handle E-discovery. These revisions were largely because of the Zubulake case. Additional amendments to
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure regarding E-discovery were proposed in August 2013. The Judicial
Conference Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure received over 2,000 comments on the new
rules. 51
When a lawsuit begins, parties are obligated to preserve certain types of evidence. This includes evidence
stored in an electronic format. The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure call this type of evidence “electronically
stored information” (ESI). The definition is broad and is meant to include any type of information that can be
stored electronically. The parties must address how discoverable ESI will be preserved. They also must
address the format in which it will be shared with the other party. It can be shared in its native format, which
may not be usable by the other party. It also can be shared in a reasonably useful form. If the parties do not
specify how the ESI is to be shared, then a party providing ESI must notify the requesting party of the format.
In some instances, it can be hard to produce ESI for various reasons. A party does not have to produce ESI if
it is not reasonably accessible because of undue burden or costs associated with retrieving the ESI. The
party claiming that it cannot produce ESI for these reasons bears the burden of proving that production is
overly costly or complex.
Usually, a court can sanction a party if it destroys evidence during a lawsuit. This is called the spoliation of
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.evidence. It occurs when evidence in a lawsuit is inappropriately changed or destroyed. Spoliation sanctions
can be severe. The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure recognize that sometimes ESI that is relevant to a case
may be destroyed through the normal operations of information technology systems. The Rules provide a
safe harbor to parties in these situations. The Rules state that a court may not impose sanctions on a party
for failing to produce ESI that is destroyed because of the good-faith operation of information technology
systems.
To fall into the safe harbor, the party must show that it took steps to preserve the ESI and acted in good faith.
The duty to preserve ESI arises when a party is made aware of a legal claim or is put on notice that litigation
is imminent or reasonably anticipated. Sometimes the attorney for a party might issue a preservation notice
or litigation hold. These notices tell the party exactly what type of information must be preserved and for how
long. Sometimes attorneys for opposing parties will send these types of notices to each other or witnesses to
make sure that ESI is preserved.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Common Tort Law Actions in Cyberspace
Torts are wrongful acts between individuals. Lawyers and commentators have
started to use the term cybertorts to describe torts arising from internet
communications. 52 (Terms are always trendier when cyber is added as a preface!)
Courts are applying traditional tort law principles to areas where communications
and personal interactions occur electronically. This section will briefly describe some
of the ways that tort law concepts have been applied to online interactions.
Defamation
Defamation is an intentional tort. Defamation occurs when one person speaks or
publishes a false statement of fact about another person that injures that person’s
reputation. There are two types of defamation cases. They are:
Libel—Written defamation
Slander—Oral defamation
The distinction between libel and slander has diminished in recent years, with
“defamation” being used generally to refer to both types of cases. Defamation cases
in cyberspace involving written communications are considered libel cases. To prove
defamation, a plaintiff must show all of the following:
That the defendant made a false statement of fact
That the defendant published the statement to third parties
That the defendant knew or should have known that the statement was false
A defamatory statement must be more than mere opinion. For instance, in Hammer
v. Amazon.com (2005), the plaintiff, a self-published author, sued Amazon.com for
defamation. An online reviewer gave the plaintiff’s book a negative review, which
Amazon published. The plaintiff wanted Amazon to remove the review, which it
refused to do. The court ruled that the reviewer’s statements were opinion and could
not support a defamation claim. 53
NOTE
The term flaming refers to contentious debates between online posters, which often occur on online
discussion boards. People might be able to use these types of statements to support a defamation case.
The defamatory statement must be published to third parties. The publication
requirement is easily satisfied when information is posted on the internet. In fact,
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.because many people have access to the internet and materials posted on it, it may
be easier for a plaintiff to show publication in an internet defamation case.
Information posted on the internet may reach an audience more quickly. It also could
lead to greater damage to the plaintiff.
Finally, the plaintiff must show that the defendant knew, or should have known,
that the statement was false. A plaintiff shows this by presenting evidence that the
defendant did not check facts or the source of a statement.
Some types of statements are so scandalous that a court automatically presumes
that defamation has occurred. These types of statements are called defamation per
se. Per se is a Latin phrase that means “by itself.” Types of statements considered
defamation per se include:
Statements that a person has a loathsome disease
Statements that a person has committed a crime
Statements about sexual misconduct or chastity
Statements about professional impropriety
If a defamation case involves these types of statements, the plaintiffs do not have to
prove all the defamation elements. They just must prove their damages.
NOTE
Traditionally, loathsome diseases were diseases such as leprosy and venereal disease. They are diseases
that have great social stigma.
Defamation is considered in context. A court must consider all the facts and
circumstances around a case. In a traditional defamation case, the plaintiff can sue
both the original maker of the defamatory statement and anyone who republishes
the statement. These lines are blurred online. It makes it especially hard to
determine where a defamatory statement first appears.
Understanding what constitutes a defamatory statement online can be hard—
especially in cases involving social media. In 2019, a unanimous jury held that Elon
Musk did not defame another individual through statements that Musk made through
three tweets over Twitter. 54
Internet Service Provider Liability for Torts
Congress enacted the Communications Decency Act in 1996. However, the U.S. Supreme Court declared
many portions of this Act unconstitutional because they infringed on free speech rights. One part of the Act
that is still in effect is Section 230. 55
Section 230 protects interactive computer service providers from liability for the actions of content providers.
The Act recognizes that “[t]he rapidly developing array of internet and other interactive computer services
available to individual Americans represent an extraordinary advance in the availability of educational and
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.informational resources to our citizens.” 56 It also recognized that Americans rely on interactive media for
educational and entertainment information. In enacting the policy, Congress sought “to encourage the
development of technologies which maximize user control over what information is received by individuals,
families, and schools who use the Internet and other interactive computer services.” 57
Under the law, an interactive computer service is any electronic information service or system. It specifically
includes a service or system that provides access to the internet. Courts interpret this definition as broadly as
possible. The act states that an interactive computer service provider may not be treated as the “publisher” or
“speaker” of content posted by service users. This is a safe harbor for interactive computer service providers.
It protects them from legal liability for the actions of service users.
Courts have applied this provision quite broadly to many companies who offer services over the internet such
as social networking or bulletin board posting services. For instance, courts have found that Facebook,
Craigslist, YouTube, and Twitter are interactive service providers who fall under the section’s protection.
ISPs rely on this law to insulate themselves from the actions of their customers. Section 230 specifically
preempts state or local laws that would hold ISPs responsible for the acts of content providers.
The defendant can raise some defenses to a defamation allegation. Truth, for
example, is an absolute defense to a defamation allegation. A court cannot hold a
defendant responsible for defamatory statements if the statements were truthful.
Another defense is that the defendant acted in good faith. Statements that a
defendant makes in connection with judicial or legislative proceedings have immunity
from a defamation action. These types of statements are called privileged
statements.
One problem for online defamation cases is that it is sometimes difficult for a
plaintiff to discover the identity of an online poster. This is particularly true if an
anonymous poster makes defamatory statements in an online forum. Plaintiffs often
have to go to court to get an ISP to turn over identifying information about an
anonymous online poster.
A final item to remember is that online tort cases often involve jurisdictional
issues as well. State courts can hold out-of-state defendants responsible for their
actions only in limited circumstances. Most states have complicated tests, called
“long-arm jurisdiction” tests, for when they can exercise jurisdiction over an out-of-
state defendant. Lawyers and courts use this term because it describes situations
where the “long arm of the law” can pull a defendant into a certain jurisdiction. This is
the same type of problem that was discussed in the criminal law section of this
chapter. These types of jurisdiction issues sometimes mean that a plaintiff must
litigate a case in a state other than the state where she or he lives.
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress
Intentional infliction of emotional distress (IIED) is known as the tort of outrage. This
is because it is used to address conduct that is so offensive that a reasonable
person would say “Outrageous!” To prove this tort, a plaintiff must show:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.That the defendant acted intentionally or recklessly
That the defendant’s conduct was extreme and outrageous
That the defendant’s conduct caused the plaintiff severe emotional distress
NOTE
Many states also recognize the tort of negligent infliction of emotional distress. This tort can be harder to
prove because one of the elements is that the defendant owed the plaintiff a duty to act in a certain way.
There is no duty requirement in IIED cases.
The Restatement (Second) of the Law of Torts notes that extreme and outrageous
conduct is “beyond all possible bounds of decency and to be regarded as atrocious,
and utterly intolerable in a civilized community.” 58 Courts have recognized that
people have the right to be free from this type of behavior. Even though courts
recognize this cause of action, they have held that the defendant’s conduct truly
must be extreme and outrageous given the circumstances. Mere bad or boorish
behavior is not enough under this tort.
The landmark case recognizing this tort happened in California. 59 In this case, the
defendant won a contract for trash collection from a private entity. The contract was
previously held by a member of the State Rubbish Collectors Association. The
defendant was not a member of the association. The association intimidated the
defendant into signing its membership agreement. Association members threatened
to hurt the defendant and destroy his garbage truck.
The association then sued the defendant to collect dues as stated in the
membership agreement. The defendant argued that the agreement was invalid
because the association had threatened him and he signed the agreement under
duress. He also argued that the plaintiff’s actions caused him to become severely ill
and miss work.
In ruling on the case, the court said that a person has the right to live his life
without “serious, intentional, and unprivileged invasions of emotional and mental
tranquility.” 60 The court found that the defendant stated a claim for IIED and could
recover damages based on his IIED claim.
IIED cases can arise through email, comments made on social networking sites,
and instant messaging. Because IIED cases involve interactions between a plaintiff
and defendant, evidence proving the contents of the electronic communications can
be very important. Similar to defamation cases, in most instances ISPs are not liable
for the actions of content providers that cause an IIED.
FYI
Often IIED cases involve situations where a person is using a work email account or internet access to
commit the tortious activity. There are times when employers might be liable for the bad acts of
employees. Employers can be liable for their employees’ actions when those actions take place within the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.scope of the employee’s job. An employer also must have knowledge of the employee’s tortious acts.
Courts have been reluctant to hold employers responsible for the cybertorts of employees unless the
employer had knowledge of its employee’s actions and did not take steps to stop them.
IIED claims also can involve claims of harassment. Some states recognize
harassment as a tort, whereas most consider it criminal behavior. Some states also
have included cyberstalking or online harassment in their criminal harassment laws.
For example, Oklahoma and New York have anti-stalking laws that include online
harassment as a prohibited activity. 61
Harassment is similar to IIED in that the harasser intends to cause the plaintiff
emotional distress. Harassment can include continuing to communicate with a
person when she or he has asked that the harasser no longer talk to him or her. It
also can include threats made against a person or that person’s loved ones.
Harassment also can include offensive sexual remarks and remarks based on
characteristics such as race, national origin, religion, and gender.
Similar to IIED, harassment can very easily take place in the online environment.
It can occur via email, postings on social networking web pages, and postings on
other web pages.
Trespass Torts
Common law recognizes trespass torts. In common law, there are two types of
trespass cases: trespass on land and trespass to chattels. Chattels mean personal
property. Trespass to chattels is intentionally interfering with a person’s use or
possession of personal property. The defendant’s use of the plaintiff’s personal
property must cause an injury or damage. Often this happens when the defendant
harms the personal property in some way.
Courts have extended trespass to chattels cases to online situations, such as
spam email. The first court case holding spammers responsible for trespass to
chattels was in 1997. 62 In that case, an ISP sued a defendant for bypassing the ISP’s
spam-blocking controls to send spam emails to the ISP’s customers. The defendant
had changed the header information on its spam emails so that the emails could
could get past the ISP’s spam filters. The ISP argued that the spam emails imposed
a burden on its system. It also argued that the defendant’s spam messages were an
intrusion to the ISP’s system because they bypassed filtering controls. The U.S.
District Court for the Southern District of Ohio found that the defendant’s spamming
activities did indeed constitute a trespass of that system. 63
NOTE
Remember, in tort cases, a plaintiff must show that he or she incurred damages from the defendant’s bad
conduct.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.In a trespass to chattels case, the plaintiff must be able to prove that he or she
was injured or harmed. This is the most difficult element to show in online cases. In
2003, the Intel Corporation sued an ex-employee for sending spam emails to over
30,000 Intel employees on multiple occasions. The California Supreme Court
rejected Intel’s trespass claim because it was unable to prove any damages. Intel
was not able to show that the thousands of emails slowed its servers or caused
some sort of adverse effect on its computer systems. 64
Privacy Violations
The four privacy torts are:
Intrusion into seclusion
Portrayal in a false light
Appropriation of likeness or identity
Public disclosure of private facts
Privacy torts were discussed earlier in this book. Courts are beginning to recognize
that people have a right to privacy in their electronic equipment and electronic
communications. The intrusion into seclusion privacy tort is used most often in this
context. For example, a plaintiff may be able to sue a defendant for accessing the
plaintiff’s private electronic blog without permission. However, the rise of the internet
as a communications and entertainment medium may mean that other privacy torts,
such as portrayal in a false light, may grow as well.
A question that is yet to be resolved is whether people have a true right of privacy
in their use of the internet, independent of any tortious or criminal activity. A person’s
privacy on the internet is somewhat limited by the logging mechanisms that ISPs and
web pages employ to make sure that systems are operating correctly. Programs
used by service providers to track activity for advertising purposes also are threats to
privacy.
Tort cases are firmly rooted in state laws. There may be other tort actions that a
plaintiff can use to seek redress for harmful activities in cyberspace. If a plaintiff is
harmed by actions in cyberspace and has damages and injuries that he or she can
prove, the plaintiff will need to review state laws and court cases for appropriate
causes of action.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Case Studies and Examples
The following case studies and examples show how the concepts discussed in this
chapter are used. These case studies are real-world examples of criminal and tort
law issues in cyberspace.
CAN-SPAM Act
The U.S. government first brought criminal charges under the CAN-SPAM Act in
April 2004. The U.S. Postal Inspection Service, U.S. Attorneys’ office, and FTC were
involved in investigating the case.
In this case, the federal government charged the defendants with sending spam
messages to sell phony diet products. The defendants operated under the name
Phoenix Avatar, LLC. The defendants hid their identities in spam messages by using
corporate and government computer systems and spoofing third-party email
addresses. They used computers belonging to Ford Motor Company, computers
used by the U.S. court system, and the Unisys Corporation to hide their identities.
Undeliverable spam bounced back to the innocent third-party email addresses.
Phoenix Avatar sent millions of spam messages this way.
One of the defendants in the case, Daniel Lin, pleaded guilty to violations of the
CAN-SPAM Act in January 2006. In June 2006, the court sentenced him to 3 years
in federal prison.
NOTE
You can read the FTC enforcement action documents for the Phoenix Avatar case at
https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-proceedings/042-3084/phoenix-avatar-llc-dba-avatar-nutrition-djl-
llc-et-al.
The FTC filed a civil enforcement action against Phoenix Avatar. The FTC
brought the action for violations of both the FTC Act and the CAN-SPAM Act. The
FTC Act violations were related to the defendant’s sale of the phony diet products.
In March 2005, the FTC settled civil charges against Phoenix Avatar. As part of
the settlement, the defendants agreed to pay a $20,000 penalty. They also agreed
not to violate the CAN-SPAM Act in the future.
Defamation on College Campuses
The internet has many anonymous gossip websites. Juicy Campus, one of the first
popular sites, started in 2007 and closed down in February 2009. It allowed college
students to post anonymous gossip about events and people at their campuses.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Juicy Campus had separate web pages for different colleges.
Juicy Campus billed itself as a way to promote free speech on college campuses.
Among its features, anonymous users could post gossip about other students, read
gossip posted by other users, and vote on the “juiciest” pieces of gossip. Students
ridiculed or insulted on Juicy Campus had little recourse, as the postings were
anonymous. As an ISP, Juicy Campus did not share the identities of its online
posters without a court order.
Since Juicy Campus closed down, other online campus gossip websites have
grown in popularity. One of the sites that opened when Juicy Campus shut down
was College ACB. In a press release, the owner of the website wrote: “The College
ACB or College Anonymous Confession Board seeks to give students a place to
vent, rant, and talk to college peers in an environment free from social constraints
and about subjects that might otherwise be taboo.” College ACB closed down in
2011. 65
AutoAdmit, a similar site, is an online law school discussion board. As on similar
gossip websites, posts in that forum sometimes can be insulting and offensive. In
2007, two Yale Law School students sued anonymous AutoAdmit posters for
defamation. The parties settled the case in 2009. The terms of the settlement were
confidential. You can learn more about that case on the Citizen Media Law project
web page at http://www.citmedialaw.org/threats/autoadmit#description.
Think about websites and apps that create experiences where you can hang out
in chat rooms with nearby people. Some allow people to post anonymously. Some
do not. How do they promote free speech? Are there occasions on these apps and
websites where one person’s right to free speech infringes upon another person’s
right to live peacefully?
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter discussed criminal and tort law issues in cyberspace. As part of
the discussion, criminal and civil procedure rules were reviewed. Criminal
and civil procedure refers to court processes used to conduct trials. Criminal
procedure is the process governments use to hold criminals responsible for
their actions. Civil procedure is the process individuals use to settle disputes
with others.
The chapter also discussed substantive criminal and tort laws applicable to
online activities. There are many federal laws that governments can use to
help prevent and punish cybercrime. Individuals also can use traditional tort
law concepts to seek redress for harm that they experience on the internet.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Actus reus
Answer
Complaint
Duty of due care
Felonies
Flaming
Libel
Mala in se
Mala prohibita
Mens rea
Misdemeanors
Personal jurisdiction
Slander
Spam
Statute of limitations
Subject matter jurisdiction
Tortfeasor
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.CHAPTER 12 ASSESSMENT
1. Only the federal government prosecutes felonies.
A. True
B. False
2. Provide a brief definition of “crime.”
3. What is mala in se?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Conduct that a society declares is inherently wrong
Conduct that society prohibits
A person’s criminal intent
A criminal act
None of these is correct.
4. What element(s) must a government prove to show a crime has been
committed?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Mens rea
Mala prohibita
Actus reus
Mens rea and mala prohibita
Mens rea and actus reus
5. What type of jurisdictional issue is a concern in a cybercrime case?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Original jurisdiction
Subject matter jurisdiction
Personal jurisdiction
Appellate jurisdiction
None of these is correct.
6. The ________ guarantees a defendant the right to a speedy trial.
7. The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act applies to any unauthorized access to any
kind of computer.
A. True
B. False
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.8. Which federal laws can be used to prosecute phishing scams?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
The Patriot Act
The CAN-SPAM Act
All of these are correct.
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act and the CAN-SPAM Act
9. Cybertorts are most likely which type of tort?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Intentional torts
Negligent torts
Strict liability torts
Crimes
None of these is correct.
10. To prove an intentional infliction of emotional distress tort, a plaintiff must show
that the defendant’s conduct is ________.
11. Internet service providers often have tort immunity for the actions of content
providers.
A. True
B. False
12. What is the time period during which a plaintiff must begin a lawsuit?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Statute of frauds
Statute on liability
Statute of limitations
Pleadings statute
None of these is correct.
13. What is a defense to a defamation case?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Comparative negligence
Contributory negligence
Assumption of risk
The truth
None of these is correct.
14. The two types of defamation cases are ________.
15. What type of document must a plaintiff file to begin a civil lawsuit?
A. Answer
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.Discovery
Motion for Summary Judgment
Counter-claim
Complaint
B.
C.
D.
E.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.ENDNOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
Wisconsin Statutes, sec. 940.01.
Wisconsin Statutes, sec. 940.02.
Robinson v. California, 370 U.S. 660 (1962).
CNN.com, “Couple: Internet Gaming Addiction Led to Baby’s Death,” April 2,
2010. Available at
https://www.cnn.com/2010/WORLD/asiapcf/04/01/korea.parents.starved.baby/
(accessed May 1, 2020).
Strassheim v. Daily, 221 U.S. 280 (1911).
Alaska Statutes, title 12, sec. 12.05.010.
Council of Europe, Treaty Office, “Convention of Cybercrime Signatories,”
undated. Available at https://www.coe.int/en/web/conventions/full-list/-
/conventions/treaty/185 (accessed May 1, 2020).
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, “eConsumer Statistics,” April 15, 2020.
Available at
https://public.tableau.com/profile/federal.trade.commission#!/vizhome/eConsumer/Infog
(accessed May 1, 2020).
Pew Research Center, “Only 2% of Federal Criminal Defendants Go to Trial,
and Most Who Do Are Found Guilty,” June 11, 2019. Available at
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/06/11/only-2-of-federal-criminal-
defendants-go-to-trial-and-most-who-do-are-found-guilty/ (accessed May 1,
2020).
Gideon v. Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335 (1963).
Giglio v. United States, 405 U.S. 150 (1972).
Brady v. Maryland, 373 U.S. 83 (1963).
Strunk v. United States, 412 U.S. 434 (1973).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1030.
Internet Crime Complaint Center, “2019 Annual Internet Crime Report,” 2019.
Available at https://pdf.ic3.gov/2019_IC3Report.pdf (accessed May 1, 2020).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1030(e).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1030(e)(6).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1030(e)(6).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1030(e)(8).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1029.
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, “Consumer Sentinel Network Data Book
2019,” January 2020. Available at
https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/documents/reports/consumer-sentinel-network-
data-book-2019/consumer_sentinel_network_data_book_2019.pdf (May 1,
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
2020).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1028.
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 2510.
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 3121.
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 2701.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 7701; U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1037.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 7704(d).
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 7704(a).
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 7706.
U.S. Federal Trade Commission, “FTC Completes Review of CAN-SPAM Rule,”
February 12, 2019. Available at https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-
releases/2019/02/ftc-completes-review-can-spam-rule (accessed May 1, 2020).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1037.
Information Week, “War-Driving Pornographic Spammer Escapes Jail Time,”
August 1, 2007. Available at https://www.informationweek.com/war-driving-
pornographic-spammer-escapes-jail-time/d/d-id/1057666 (accessed May 1,
2020).
U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1037.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1125(d).
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1125(d)(1)(B).
U.S. Code, Title 47, sec. 223(a)(1)(c).
U.S. Code, Title 18, sec. 2261A.
U.S. Code, Title 18, sec. 875(c).
Stopbullying.gov, “What Is Cyberbullying?” May 30, 2019. Available at
https://www.stopbullying.gov/cyberbullying/what-is-it (accessed May 1, 2020).
Department of Justice, “Missouri Woman Indicted on Charges of Using
MySpace to Cyber Bully 13-Year-Old Who Later Committed Suicide,” May 15,
2008. Available at
https://www.justice.gov/archive/usao/cac/Pressroom/pr2008/063.html (accessed
May 1, 2020).
U.S. v. Drew, 259 F.R.D. 449 (C.D. Cal. 2009).
U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Morris Worm,” undated. Available at
https://www.fbi.gov/history/famous-cases/morris-worm (accessed May 1, 2020).
U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation, “Melissa Virus,” undated. Available at
https://www.fbi.gov/history/famous-cases/melissa-virus (accessed May 1, 2020).
The New York Times Magazine, “The Great Cyberheist,” November 10, 2020.
Available at https://www.nytimes.com/2010/11/14/magazine/14Hacker-t.html
(accessed May 1, 2020).
Palsgraf v. Long Island Railroad, 162 N.E. 99 (N.Y. 1928).
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 8.
Indiana Code, 34-11-2-4.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.48. Montana Code Annotated, 27-2-204(3).
49. Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 12.
50. Zubulake v. UBS Warburg, LLC, 2004 WL1620866 (S.D.N.Y. July 20, 2004).
This was the final E-discovery decision handed down in the Zubulake case.
51. Regulations.gov, “Proposed Amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure,” undated. Available at
http://www.regulations.gov/#!docketDetail;D=USC-RULES-CV-2013-0002
(accessed May 1, 2020).
52. Rustad, Michael L. Internet Law. St. Paul, MN: Thomson Reuters, 2009, p. 143.
53. Hammer v. Amazon.com, 392 F.Supp.2d 423 (E.D.N.Y. 2005).
54. Court Listener, “Docket for Vernon Unsworth v. Elon Musk (2:18-cv-08048),”
March 11, 2020. Available at
https://www.courtlistener.com/docket/7887513/vernon-unsworth-v-elon-musk/
(accessed May 1, 2020).
55. U.S. Code, Vol. 47, sec. 230.
56. U.S. Code, Vol. 47, sec. 230(a)(1).
57. U.S. Code, Vol. 47, sec. 230(b)(3).
58. Restatement (Second) of the Law of Torts, sec. 46, cmt. d.
59. State Rubbish Collectors Association v. Siliznoff, 240 P.2d 282 (Ca. 1952).
60. State Rubbish Collectors Association v. Siliznoff, 240 P.2d 282 (Ca. 1952).
61. New York Penal Code, Ch. 40, sec. 240.30; Oklahoma Statutes, Title 21, sec.
1173.
62. CompuServe, Inc. v. Cyber Promotions, Inc., 962 F.Supp. 1015 (S.D. Ohio
1997).
63. CompuServe, Inc. v. Cyber Promotions, Inc., 962 F.Supp. 1015 (S.D. Ohio
1997).
64. Intel Corp v. Hamidi, 71 P.3d 296 (Ca. 2003).
65. College ACB, “College ACB Press Release,” February 5, 2009. Available at
http://collegeacb.blogspot.com/2009/02/collegeacb-press-release.html
(accessed May 1, 2020).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.PART III
Security and Privacy in Organizations
Information Security Governance
CHAPTER 14 Risk Analysis, Incident Response, and Contingency
Planning
CHAPTER 15 Computer Forensics and Investigations
CHAPTER 13
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:47:03.
