© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
CHAPTER
6
Security and Privacy of Health
Information
EALTH INFORMATION CAN be used in several different ways. For example,
doctors and other healthcare professionals use and share it to provide medical
care. Insurance companies and employers share it for insurance coverage and
payment. However, many people worry that this type of information could be used
improperly. For example, insurance companies could use it to deny healthcare
coverage. Employers could use it to decide not to hire someone. Thieves could steal
medical information and use it to commit medical identity theft.
H
Healthcare providers no longer store health information only in paper files. Many
providers use computer systems to create and store electronic health records
(EHRs). When information is stored electronically, data may be combined from
several different sources. It is possible to create comprehensive medical records that
contain a lot of data about a person; therefore, the healthcare industry must take
steps to secure these types of records.
This chapter focuses on laws that protect the privacy and security of health
information. For the most part, this chapter focuses on the unique challenges
presented by growing amounts of electronic health information. This chapter also
discusses how federal and state laws work together to protect this information.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Chapter 6 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
What the business challenges facing the healthcare industry are
Why healthcare information is sensitive
What the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
is
What the role of state law in protecting medical records is
What some case studies and examples are
Chapter 6 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the business challenges facing the healthcare industry
Explain why healthcare information is sensitive
Explain the main parts of the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA)
Describe the role of state law in protecting the confidentiality of
medical records
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Business Challenges Facing the Healthcare
Industry
The healthcare industry faces many of the same privacy and security challenges as
other industries. The difference is the type of data that is used. The healthcare
industry collects consumer financial and personal health information. Healthcare
providers collect consumer financial information to make sure that consumers pay
for medical goods and services. They collect health information to provide these
goods and services. Many people consider health information to be very sensitive.
The healthcare industry often collects data from several sources and stores this
data in electronic form. For example, hospital computer systems contain notes from
hospital employees and primary care physicians. These systems may also record
data from equipment and medication tracking systems that can be linked to
individual patients. Health insurance companies collect and combine patient data
from different providers. It is important for organizations to maintain the security of
computer systems that hold health data. Patients demand that this data be
protected. Unfortunately, health information often is compromised in data breaches,
which can cause problems for healthcare consumers.
NOTE
In November 2018, Anthem, Inc. agreed to pay $16 million to settle allegations that it violated federal laws
that protected patient records. Anthem is one of the largest health benefit companies in the United States.
The health information of 79 million people was exposed in a series of cyber attacks that targeted Anthem
in 2014 and 2015. 1
Health information can be exploited and used improperly. One such crime is
medical identity theft, a specialized type of identity theft in which thieves steal a
person’s name and other parts of his or her medical identity. They then use this
information to get medical services or goods. When the thief gets health care,
providers may add treatment notes about the thief on the victim’s medical record.
The thief can use personal information obtained from health records to steal health
insurance information and make a false claim for healthcare services. Unpaid
medical charges could end up on the victim’s credit report.
FYI
A 2015 study by the Ponemon Institute estimated that victims of medical identity theft pay, on average,
almost $13,500 in costs linked to the theft. 2
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Medical identity thieves are not exclusively computer hackers or members of
organized crime rings. Healthcare providers, such as doctors, dentists, and hospital
employees, also can be identity thieves. In 2003, for example, an employee at a
cancer center stole the identity of a center patient. The identity thief was sentenced
to 16 months in prison and ordered to pay restitution. 3
In 2019, a medical clinic office worker was arrested on charges of identity theft
and wire fraud. The office worker’s job gave her access to patient medical
information, which she stole and sold. She was caught when she tried to sell the
stolen patient information to a law enforcement officer. A search of her home and
vehicle when she was arrested turned up stolen information on 113 patients. The
office worker pleaded guilty to the charges in January 2020 and was sentenced to 4
years in federal prison. 4
Medical identity theft is very serious, as it can damage a victim’s finances with
false insurance claims for services. Similar to regular identity theft, victims must
spend time and money resolving payment disputes and credit issues. It also can
affect payment for a victim’s future medical care. If a thief’s medical information
becomes a part of the victim’s medical record, the victim may not qualify for some
medical insurance benefits.
Medical identity theft also can harm a person’s physical safety. In this crime,
healthcare providers enter diagnoses and treatment notes about the identity thief
onto a victim’s medical record. If doctors rely on those false notes later, they could
give a victim an erroneous diagnosis. If false health information concerns life-
threatening conditions, a victim could even be killed by an incorrect course of
treatment.
Medical identity theft is a problem because it can be hard to correct false
information in a medical record. Because health information is shared electronically
for several purposes such as treatment and payment, it can be hard to determine all
of the places where false information must be corrected.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Why Is Healthcare Information So Sensitive?
Most people consider their medical information to be among the most sensitive types
of personal information because it can be full of private details that people do not
want to share. However, people must share these details with healthcare providers
to receive treatment. Providers include this information in medical records. These
records contain information on diagnoses, lab results, and treatment options. They
also contain information about chronic conditions or mental health counseling, as
well as private details about a person’s lifestyle.
Doctor/patient confidentiality is a long-held tradition. The Hippocratic Oath, a
pledge that many medical school students recite upon their graduation which dates
back to the fourth century B.C.E., recognizes this belief. The traditional version of the
oath states: “Whatever I see or hear in the lives of my patients, whether in
connection with my professional practice or not, which ought not to be spoken of
outside, I will keep secret, as considering all such things to be private.” 5 The
statement means that a doctor will keep the patient’s health secrets.
NOTE
When a judge orders defendants to pay restitution, it is paid to victims to compensate them for damages
related to a crime.
Health records often contain intimate details about a person. People fear that
they will be embarrassed if their health information is not kept secret. Some people
may even fear for their lives if particularly intimate facts, such as reasons for health
counseling, are disclosed. Another fear among people is that others may
discriminate against them. They fear that insurance companies or employers could
reject them because of information in their health records. For instance, people who
have been treated for anxiety or high blood pressure in the past might fear that their
application for private life insurance will be denied. People with a known genetic
predisposition for certain types of diseases might fear that they will be denied health
insurance.
The U.S. government recognizes the special sensitivity of some medical records.
For example, the Drug Abuse Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Act of 1980 6
protects patient information about alcohol or drug abuse. This law applies to any
federally assisted alcohol or drug abuse treatment program. It states that these
programs may not disclose patient information without consent. There are very few
exceptions to this rule. Patient information can be disclosed without consent only in
limited situations. For example, a treatment program may disclose patient
information in a medical emergency or to report child abuse.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.People often feel as if they have little control over where their health information
is shared, which is a privacy concern. Providers share health information for
treatment purposes. It is also shared with government agencies if payment is made
through government programs such as Medicaid or Medicare. It is also shared with
insurance companies. Insurance companies sometimes ask for health insurance
records to make decisions about whether a person is a suitable risk for life or health
insurance. These records are shared in court cases, particularly if a plaintiff claims
an injury in a lawsuit. They are used to prove that a defendant caused the plaintiff’s
injury and is liable for that injury.
FYI
The MIB Group, Inc. is an industry group of U.S. and Canadian insurance companies that helps protect
against fraud in the insurance industry. Group members share information about life, health, and long-term
care insurance applicants to make sure that applicants do not conceal or hide certain types of health
information. Insurance companies need some of this information to determine whether a person is
insurable. This helps avoid fraudulent insurance applications and claims. MIB members share this
information in a coded format to protect privacy.
The MIB is subject to several U.S. security and privacy laws. These include the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act
(GLBA), the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), and Canadian privacy legislation.
To learn more about the MIB, visit http://www.mib.com.
People can do very little to mitigate an improper disclosure of their health
information. Although they may feel a social stigma if certain facts are shared
indiscriminately or exposed in a data breach, there are few ways to correct that
stigma. For instance, people recovering from substance abuse might not want other
people to know. They may be concerned that society will judge them unfairly for their
past substance abuse. They also may be concerned about being denied
employment or other opportunities. They may worry that they could be prosecuted
for using illegal substances. No amount of money or fines assessed against a
provider who improperly discloses this information can compensate a patient for
such embarrassment or fear. People cannot be instructed to “forget” this type of
information once they hear it.
The federal government recognizes that health information is highly sensitive.
The HIPAA is the best-known U.S. law protecting the security and privacy of health
information.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.The Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act
Congress passed the HIPAA in 1996 to help make health insurance portable. HIPAA
is used to fight health insurance fraud and eliminate waste. It also simplifies how
health insurance is administered.
HIPAA was amended in 2009 by the Health Information Technology for Economic
and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act), 7 which was part of the American Recovery
and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) of 2009. The HITECH Act included the most
sweeping changes to HIPAA since the law was first created.
Purpose
HIPAA is best known for its rules that protect the privacy and security of personally
identifiable health information. These terms are part of the law’s “Administrative
Simplification” requirements. Although these rules are the focus of this chapter, it is
important that you know that HIPAA has other provisions as well. They were enacted
so that health insurance could be portable, or carried from one employer to another.
Before HIPAA, some workers felt that they were stuck in a job because they feared
they would lose their health insurance if they changed jobs.
HIPAA protects healthcare coverage when workers change jobs. In this way, it
protects both workers and their families. It forbids a new employer’s health plan from
denying coverage for some reasons, and prohibits employers from discriminating
against workers based on certain conditions, such as pregnancy. It also limits
employer-provided health plans from using preexisting conditions as reasons for
excluding workers from the plan.
NOTE
Job lock refers to situations where workers feel locked into their jobs. They are afraid they will lose their
employer-provided benefits if they leave.
A preexisting condition is a health condition that existed before a person applies
for a medical or other insurance policy. Insurance companies have different ways of
dealing with these types of conditions. Some may provide only partial coverage for
them. Others may not cover them at all. Still other companies may cover the
condition only after a certain period of time has passed.
HIPAA protects workers in group health plans. Employers that offer health
insurance coverage typically offer these types of plans. HIPAA does not require that
employers offer health coverage. If they do, however, HIPAA applies. Most of
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.HIPAA’s rules apply to situations when workers change jobs or move from one group
health plan to another. This is the “portability” portion of the law. HIPAA does not
apply to situations where a worker had no health coverage at all and then gets a job
with healthcare coverage.
HIPAA’s preexisting condition rules are very important, because they help prevent
job lock. They also promote mobility. HIPAA limits preexisting condition exclusions in
two ways.
The 2009 HITECH Act
In February 2009, Congress passed the HITECH Act, which was part of the ARRA of 2009. ARRA was a
$787 billion stimulus package President Obama signed into law on February 17, 2009. ARRA contained
incentives to encourage the adoption of healthcare information technologies; and as such anticipated an
increase in the use and exchange of electronic protected health information (EPHI). Because of this, the
HITECH Act was included to strengthen HIPAA privacy and security protections for protected health
information (PHI).
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) rules implementing the HITECH Act were published in
January 2013 and took a long time to create. The HITECH Regulations became effective March 26, 2013,
and compliance was required by September 23, 2013. The HITECH Act and HHS regulations made major
changes to the steps that healthcare providers must take to protect the privacy and security of health
information. The HITECH Act also created a federal breach notification law for healthcare information. This
means that healthcare providers must notify people if their health information is involved in a security breach.
Sometimes the HITECH Act’s provisions will be highlighted in the text of this chapter because it represented
such a large change to the original HIPAA legislation.
The Difference Between COBRA and HIPAA
Often the words COBRA and HIPAA are used when discussing continuing health benefits following job loss
or resignation. Although both laws work together to help protect employees and their health benefits, they
have different functions.
COBRA, the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986, 8 allows some types of employees
(and their families) to continue their health coverage when they change or lose a job. COBRA is usually more
expensive than health coverage under the employer’s plan. However, it is usually less expensive than
individual coverage through a private health insurance company.
COBRA covers employer-provided health plans that have 20 or more employees. It also applies to health
coverage offered by federal, state, and local governments. Former employees qualify for COBRA if they leave
a job voluntarily. They also are eligible for COBRA if they are terminated for any reason other than gross
misconduct. To be eligible for COBRA, a former employee must have been enrolled in an employer’s health
plan at the time of separation from the job.
When employees leave their job, they must receive a notice from their employer about COBRA eligibility.
Former employees who qualify are entitled to health coverage that is the same as they had while they were
employed. Under COBRA, former employees must pay their own health insurance premiums. This includes
any amount a former employer might have previously paid on the employees’ behalf. COBRA benefits usually
last for a maximum of 18 months.
COBRA lets employees continue to get health coverage that they had through an employer for a certain
period of time. HIPAA, in contrast, makes sure that an employee is not discriminated against in new health
coverage because of health history and preexisting conditions.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.First, it allows employer-provided health plans to look back only 6 months for
preexisting conditions. A condition counts as preexisting only if a worker received
treatment for it sometime over the 6 months before enrolling in a health plan. If a
worker did not receive treatment for the condition in those 6 months, then the
condition is not preexisting.
The second limitation applies to conditions that are determined to be preexisting.
HIPAA limits the amount of time that employer-provided health plans can force a
worker to “sit out” of coverage because of these conditions. Before HIPAA, health
plans could force workers with preexisting conditions to do without coverage for
those conditions for a very long time. In most instances, HIPAA limits this waiting
period to 12 months. However, that period can be shortened in many situations.
HIPAA also provides some protection against discrimination based upon genetic
testing results. HIPAA states that the results of these types of tests alone cannot be
considered a preexisting condition. There must be an illness diagnosis to trigger a
preexisting condition. This rule is very important as more people become aware of
their genetic histories. Genetic testing is used to determine if a person is more likely
to have some illnesses or diseases. This information is very sensitive. Under HIPAA,
a woman who has been genetically tested and has the breast cancer gene cannot
be denied coverage in an employer-provided health plan if she has not been
diagnosed with breast cancer. Just having the gene cannot be considered a
preexisting condition.
NOTE
More than 30 million people have taken consumer genetic information tests offered by companies such as
Ancestry and 23andMe. 9 These consumer tests give people access to their genetic information without
involvement from a healthcare provider.
Other HIPAA provisions were aimed at improving U.S. health care. These
provisions, called the “Administrative Simplification” provisions as previously noted,
were designed to encourage “the development of a health information system
through the establishment of standards and requirements for the electronic
transmission of certain health information.” 10 As part of these provisions, HIPAA
required the HHS to make rules regarding the privacy of individually identifiable
health information. HHS was also required to create security standards to protect
this information. This chapter addresses the Privacy and Security Rules.
FYI
The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) of 2008 11 protects against some types of genetic
testing discrimination. It states that health insurance companies cannot use genetic testing results to make
eligibility decisions about a healthy person. They also cannot use that information to determine the cost of
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.premiums. In addition, the law states that employers cannot use genetic information when making hiring,
firing, or other job decisions, and bars employers or health insurance plans from requiring genetic testing.
The future of GINA remains uncertain as genetic testing continues to explode and become more common.
In addition, challenges to the Affordable Care Act, pending in late 2019 and 2020, may weaken some of
GINA’s protections.
Scope
HIPAA’s Privacy and Security Rules tell covered entities how they may use
protected health information (PHI), which refers to any individually identifiable
information about the health of a person. PHI includes past, present, or future
information regarding mental and physical health data. 12 It also includes information
about paying for health care. PHI is commonly considered to be all information that
is put in a person’s medical record and can take any form. 13 The one exception to
PHI is that it does not include information about individuals who have been dead for
more than 50 years.
NOTE
PHI includes notes that your doctor puts in your medical record. It also includes any conversations your
doctor has with anyone else about your health care. Billing information for healthcare goods and services
provided to you is considered PHI. Information that your health insurance company has about your health
care may also be PHI.
HIPAA requires covered entities to handle PHI in certain ways. The law defines
covered entities to include health plans, healthcare clearinghouses, and any
healthcare provider that transmits certain types of health information in electronic
form. 14
A health plan is an individual or group plan that pays for medical care. It includes
group health plans of more than 50 people, a health insurance issuer, and health
maintenance organizations (HMOs). The government’s Medicare and Medicaid
programs are examples of health plans, as are military healthcare programs. All
health plans must follow HIPAA.
Many workers receive health insurance plans through their employers that help
provide medical care for workers and their families through insurance or
reimbursement. These are also group plans, with the workers and their families as
the “group” that is being insured.
A healthcare clearinghouse is an organization that processes health information
that is in a nonstandard format. For example, HIPAA requires that some healthcare
transactions be conducted in electronic format, as specified by HHS. However, some
healthcare providers may not have the ability to conduct these transactions
electronically. If they do not, they might enter into contracts with other organizations
called clearinghouses, which handle the electronic transactions on the provider’s
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.behalf. Clearinghouses include billing services or repricing companies, as well as
companies that facilitate business operations between healthcare providers and
insurers. A clearinghouse is covered by HIPAA because it conducts electronic
healthcare transactions.
A healthcare provider is a covered entity under HIPAA. As previously noted, a
covered entity is any health plan, healthcare clearinghouse, or healthcare provider
that transmits certain types of health information in electronic form. The HIPAA
Security and Privacy Rules “cover” them. An entity is covered if it provides health
care and if it shares certain types of information electronically. This is a two-part test.
A healthcare provider is a person or organization that provides healthcare services,
including preventive and diagnostic physical care. It also includes mental health
counseling and services. In short, a provider performs all activities traditionally
associated with health care. Providers include doctors and clinics, dental practices,
and pharmacies.
FYI
The HHS provides tools to help entities determine whether they are covered by HIPAA. Those tools are
available at https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/covered-entities/index.html.
Even if an entity provides health care, it may not be a covered entity. A
healthcare provider is only a covered entity under HIPAA if it shares certain types of
information electronically. HHS calls the information that is shared a standard
transaction. A standard transaction is an electronic exchange of information for
healthcare activities that falls within defined categories. If a healthcare provider
electronically shares information that falls within a category, then it must share it in a
particular way.
HHS has defined some standard transactions. It also determines the format
requirements for each standard. These formats provide efficiency in processing
healthcare data. Some HHS standard transactions include information related to:
Billing and claims payment
Health plan eligibility
Enrollment and disenrollment in a health plan
Health plan premium payments
HIPAA also applies to the business associates of covered entities. A business
associate is an organization that performs a healthcare activity for a covered entity.
Covered entities may outsource some healthcare functions to other organizations. If
these functions include using PHI, then they are business associate functions.
Common business associate functions include claims and billing processing. They
also can include quality assurance review if it involves the use of PHI. Legal services
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.can even be business associate activities when those services require the use of
PHI.
Business associates that did not strictly meet the definition of covered entity did
not have to follow HIPAA when the law was first passed. This was problematic for
covered entities since their business associates often handled PHI and the covered
entity was responsible for ensuring that the PHI was protected properly. As a result,
covered entities and business associates entered into complicated agreements that
described how the business associates needed to protect PHI. However, this
changed when Congress passed the HITECH Act of 2009. Under the HITECH Act,
business associates must specifically follow the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules. 15
HHS may now directly require business associates to comply with HIPAA. It can also
audit business associates to make sure that they are complying with the law and can
directly impose penalties on noncompliant business associates. Today, business
associates are held to the same standard as covered entities.
Covered entities and business associates (together called “covered entities” in
this text for simplicity) that use PHI must follow the HIPAA Privacy and Security
Rules. The Privacy Rule dictates how covered entities must protect the privacy of
PHI. The Security Rule, in contrast, states how they must protect the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of electronic PHI.
Main Requirements of the Privacy Rule
HHS published the final Privacy Rule in December 2000; it was first modified in
August 2002. In January 2013, HHS published regulations implementing the
HITECH Act that made changes to many portions of the Privacy Rule. Initial
compliance with the Privacy Rule was required in April 2003. The Privacy Rule is the
first time the U.S. government has specified federal privacy protections for PHI. The
HHS said that the Privacy Rule had three main purposes:
To allow consumers to control the use of their health information. This includes
providing consumers with a way to access their health information
To improve health care in the United States by restoring consumer trust in the
healthcare system
To create a national framework for health privacy protection 16
Under the Privacy Rule, covered entities may not use or disclose people’s PHI
without their permission. However, the Rule also specifies situations where use or
disclosure is allowed without permission. The term use refers to how a covered
entity shares or handles PHI within its organization. Use refers to how employees of
a covered entity might handle PHI to provide health care. Disclosure refers to how a
covered entity shares PHI with other organizations that may not be affiliated with it. A
person must specifically consent to a use or disclosure that is not permitted by the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Privacy Rule.
The Rule also requires covered entities to put safeguards in place to protect a
person’s PHI. Covered entities must limit how their employees use and access PHI.
They also must create training programs for their employees on how to protect PHI.
Required Disclosures
Under the Privacy Rule, there are only two situations in which a covered entity must
disclose PHI:
1. When a person requests access to his or her PHI
2. When HHS is investigating the covered entity
A covered entity must disclose PHI when a person requests access to his or her PHI.
Under the Privacy Rule, people have the right to access, review, and get a copy of
their PHI. They also have the right to request that their PHI be sent directly to a third
party. This right extends to almost all records held by a covered entity that are used
to make decisions about that person. It includes PHI held in medical records, billing
information, and insurance claim information.
The Privacy Rule recognizes that people may not be able to request their own
PHI for some reason. The Rule allows people who are legally authorized to act for
another to request PHI on that person’s behalf. For instance, parents can request
the PHI of their minor children. A minor child is one who is under the age of legal
adulthood, which is determined on a state-by-state basis. For most situations in the
United States, a minor is a person under the age of 18.
Covered entities must respond to a person’s request to access PHI within a
specific period. The Rule requires covered entities to respond in 30 days. This period
can be extended to another 30 days with written notice to the requestor. 17 Additional
extensions of time are also allowed in some instances.
A covered entity may charge a reasonable fee for copying the records and
sending them to the requestor. If the records are maintained in an electronic format,
then requestors have the right to receive their records in that electronic format.
NOTE
A covered entity may not charge people requesting access to their PHI a storage retrieval fee, as that is
specifically disallowed by the Privacy Rule. However, a covered entity may charge for labor and supplies
needed to copy the records. It also may charge for postage and any electronic media needed to provide
the records.
There are some types of PHI that a covered entity does not have to provide, even
if a person specifically requests it. However, if a covered entity chooses to deny
access to PHI, then it must specify in writing why it is denying access. It should
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.explain the reason for the denial and how to appeal the denial.
Some types of PHI access denials are not appealable. For example, people
cannot challenge a covered entity’s decision to deny access to PHI in some of the
following situations:
Information that is compiled in anticipation of a lawsuit
Psychotherapy notes
Any information release that would be denied under the Privacy Act of 1974
Any information that prisons compile on inmates.
The covered entity must conduct a risk assessment about the risks of providing
access before issuing a denial.
A covered entity may choose to deny a person access to his or her PHI if it
believes that the PHI requested is reasonably likely to endanger the life or physical
safety of the person making the request. The covered entity may also deny access if
it believes that the access could cause substantial harm to another person. A person
may appeal this decision. If that happens, a licensed healthcare professional who did
not participate in the original decision to deny access will review the appeal. 18
The second type of situation where a covered entity must disclose PHI is when
HHS is investigating the covered entity. 19 This typically happens to ensure the
entities are following the Privacy Rule. A person may file a complaint with HHS if he
or she believes that a covered entity is not properly handling PHI. HHS is then
allowed to access PHI if it is necessary to review compliance with the Privacy Rule.
FYI
HHS provides a Health Information Privacy Complaint for consumer use. The complaint is available at
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/filing-a-complaint/index.html.
Permitted Uses and Disclosures
A covered entity is permitted to use and disclose a person’s PHI without written
consent in several situations. A use or disclosure that does not fall within the
situations described by the Rule is not permitted unless a person specifically allows
it. 20 HHS allows the following uses and disclosures of PHI without consent:
Made to a person about his or her own PHI
Made for treatment, payment, and healthcare operations
Made after giving a person an opportunity to opt out of the use
Made for public health and safety activities
Limited data sets of PHI used or disclosed for specified activities
Uses and Disclosures Made to a Person About His or Her Own PHI. A covered
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.entity may always disclose a person’s PHI to him or her without written consent. This
makes sense because healthcare providers must communicate with people about
their own care. It would not facilitate efficient health care if people had to specifically
authorize covered entities to discuss their health care with them. Providing a
person’s PHI to him or her when requested also is a required disclosure under the
Privacy Rule.
Treatment, Payment, and Healthcare Operations. A covered entity may use a
person’s PHI for its own treatment, payment, or healthcare operations. 21 These are
the most common covered entity activities. The Privacy Rule defines each of these
terms. A covered entity is engaging in treatment activities when it is giving health
care or services to a person. 22 These activities include managing a patient’s health
care among several providers, as well as referring a patient to another provider. A
covered entity also can disclose PHI for the treatment activities of another covered
entity. For example, a dentist can send a copy of a patient’s dental records to an
orthodontist who needs that information to treat the patient.
Payment activities are actions to get payment for healthcare goods and
services. 23 A covered entity may disclose PHI without consent for these activities,
which include billing and collection functions. They also include submitting claims for
services to health insurance companies. Covered entities also may disclose PHI to
another covered entity for the payment activities of the other entity. For instance, a
doctor can share a person’s health insurance coverage with a laboratory that it uses
to process patient blood work because the lab needs the information in order to bill
the patient for the services that it provides to the doctor.
Healthcare operations are actions that support the covered entity’s business. 24 A
covered entity may use a person’s PHI for these activities without consent. These
activities, which are the administrative and financial functions needed to run the
business, include review processes to make sure that a covered entity is compliant
with the laws that it must follow. Healthcare operations include quality assessment
and improvement actions. A covered entity may not usually share any PHI used for
these purposes with another covered entity. The only time it is allowed is when both
entities have a relationship with the person.
NOTE
Covered entities may disclose PHI to other healthcare providers for treatment and payment purposes.
These providers do not have to be covered by the Privacy Rule.
Covered entities may choose to get a person’s consent to use PHI for treatment,
payment, and healthcare operations. However, it is not required under the Privacy
Rule. 25 Even when a covered entity gets consent to share PHI for these purposes, it
should always make sure that it uses and discloses PHI in a way that is consistent
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.with its notice of privacy practices. These notices are discussed in this chapter.
Uses and Disclosures Made After an Opportunity to Opt-Out. There are some
situations where a covered entity may use or disclose a person’s PHI only after the
person has had an opportunity to opt-out of the use or disclosure. 26 An opt-out is a
more informal type of consent that only applies in limited situations. A written
consent is not needed so long as a person was advised of the right to opt-out. These
situations include publishing a patient’s name and condition in a facility directory and
sharing PHI with a person’s family and friends.
Some covered entities, such as hospitals, maintain a directory of patient
information. Nursing homes do this too, using this directory to list the person’s name,
facility room number, and general condition. However, the directory contains a
limited amount of PHI. A common example of a facility directory is a list of people
who are patients at a hospital. The covered entity must ask patients if they want their
data included in the directory. Many covered entities ask patients this question when
they enter the facility for treatment as part of a pre-admission checklist.
Covered entities also may disclose a person’s PHI to his or her family, friends,
and caregivers without written consent. The person must be given an opportunity to
opt-out of the disclosure. However, so long as a person does not object, a covered
entity can share the person’s PHI with friends, family, and caregivers. Covered
entities also can share information with friends, family, and caregivers for treatment
or payment purposes.
However, this does not mean that a covered entity may share all PHI with every
friend, family member, or caregiver. A person may place limits on these types of
disclosures. For example, the person may specify that some, but not all, family
members can receive PHI from a covered entity. For instance, a doctor may not
discuss a patient’s health information with his or her mother if the patient says not to.
In addition, a covered entity must use professional judgment in sharing PHI in
this manner if a patient is not present or is unable to object to a disclosure. For
example, a patient cannot object to a disclosure if unconscious. In these cases, the
covered entity must decide that sharing the PHI is in the patient’s best interest. For
instance, an emergency department doctor may share information about a person’s
condition with his or her family and friends if the person is in surgery.
Just because a covered entity is allowed to share PHI under the Rule does not
mean that it has to do so. For example, the covered entity is not required to share
PHI if the patient is not present or is unable to object to the disclosure. Instead, it can
choose not to disclose any PHI until someone can talk to the patient.
FYI
HHS has created guidance for patients to help them understand when healthcare providers may share
their PHI. That guidance is available at https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-individuals/guidance-materials-for-
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.consumers/index.html.
Uses and Disclosures Made for Public Health and Safety Activities. HHS
recognized that there are some situations where a covered entity should disclose a
person’s PHI. For example, sometimes it is necessary for the good of society. 27 A
covered entity does not need a person’s consent to disclose PHI in these situations.
It also does not need to give a person a chance to object. Generally, these situations
involve public safety and welfare. HHS felt that requiring a person’s consent to
disclose PHI in these situations could negatively affect society. In general, a covered
entity may disclose PHI to certain government entities without consent for the
following purposes:
To provide vital statistics
To control communicable diseases
To report abuse and neglect
When required by other laws
For law enforcement purposes
Vital Statistics and Communicable Diseases. A covered entity may disclose a
person’s PHI without consent to report births, deaths, and other vital statistics. Often
these types of reports are required by state law; therefore, a covered entity must
report these events to public health authorities. It may also disclose PHI to these
authorities to prevent or control disease, injury, or disability. These types of
disclosures of PHI do not require consent. For instance, New York healthcare
providers must report certain diseases to their local health departments; for example,
they must report highly contagious diseases and diseases that might indicate
bioterrorism. Diseases that must be reported immediately include smallpox, anthrax,
botulism, and typhoid. These diseases are serious public health threats.
The HITECH Act added regulations that allow covered entities to provide proof of
immunization to schools if required for admittance. This is because schools play an
important role in making sure children are vaccinated. In these cases, covered
entities have to document that an individual agreed to the disclosure of the records. 28
Abuse and Neglect. A covered entity may disclose PHI about victims of child abuse
or neglect without consent. 29 However, the covered entity may disclose the PHI only
to government agencies that have the legal authority to receive these reports. Child
welfare and social services agencies are allowed by state law to receive reports
about child abuse and neglect. Law enforcement agencies also are allowed to
receive these types of reports.
NOTE
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Public health is the branch of medicine that is concerned with the health of a community of people. A
public health authority is a state or federal agency that is responsible for public health matters. For
example, a state or local health department is a public health authority, as is the federal Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
All U.S. states have laws that require healthcare providers to report evidence of
child abuse and neglect. Other professionals that work with children, such as
teachers, have similar requirements. They must report information either to state
social services agencies or to local law enforcement. States make these laws
because it is important to the public welfare to protect children.
The Privacy Rule contains slightly different provisions for adult victims of abuse,
neglect, or domestic violence. 30 A covered entity may disclose PHI about adult
victims of these crimes if the disclosure is required by law and if the patient allows it.
The covered entity may still disclose PHI if a patient does not allow the disclosure, or
cannot agree to the disclosure. In that case, the covered entity must use its
professional judgment to determine that the disclosure is necessary; for example, if it
must be made to prevent serious harm to the person.
A covered entity must promptly notify a person or his or her personal
representative if it makes a disclosure of PHI in these cases. However, there are
some exceptions to this general rule. The covered entity does not have to notify an
adult victim if it believes that informing him or her would place the victim at risk of
harm. The covered entity also does not have to notify the individual’s personal
representative if it believes that the representative is responsible for the victim’s
injuries.
FYI
Attorneys are allowed to issue subpoenas for information as part of lawsuits, often as part of the discovery
process. Discovery is the legal process used to gather evidence in a lawsuit. A discovery request is a
request for information from one party in a lawsuit to the other party. These requests also can be made to
witnesses. Subpoenas issued by attorneys as part of the discovery process do not require court approval.
When a subpoena issued as part of discovery requests PHI, the individual involved must be notified.
Required by Law and Law Enforcement. A covered entity may use or disclose PHI
to the extent that it is required by law. 31 In these situations, the covered entity is
usually disclosing the PHI to some sort of governmental legal entity. For example, it
may disclose PHI in response to a court order or court-ordered warrant. It may also
disclose PHI in response to a subpoena issued by a grand jury. If the covered entity
is providing PHI in response to a discovery request generated as part of a lawsuit,
then it must notify the person who is the subject of the PHI. That person must have a
chance to object to the discovery request.
Covered entities may also disclose PHI without consent for some law
enforcement activities. For example, they may provide some types of PHI to help
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.identify or locate a suspect, witness, or missing person. Information that a covered
entity can provide in these situations is limited to identifying information, such as
name and address. It also includes distinguishing physical characteristics that could
be used to identify the person that the police are looking for.
Covered entities may also provide PHI without consent if it is requested by law
enforcement and it is about a victim of crime. They can also disclose PHI as needed
to identify or apprehend a violent criminal. Covered entities may alert law
enforcement about a person’s death if they believe that the death was caused by
criminal activity. They also may disclose PHI to law enforcement or government
officials if they believe there is a serious threat to health or safety.
Limited Data Sets Used or Disclosed for Specified Activities. A limited data set
is PHI that does not contain any data that identifies a person because it is stripped of
certain identifiers. These identifiers must be redacted from the PHI. Redaction
means protected information is removed or obscured in a document before sharing
that document with other individuals or groups.
A covered entity may share limited data sets for research, healthcare operations,
and public health activities. It does not need a person’s permission to share them.
Identifiers that must be removed from PHI in order to create a limited data set are: 32
Name
Street address (except that some geographical information may remain if certain
conditions are met)
Telephone and fax numbers
Email addresses
Social Security numbers
Medical record numbers
Health plan beneficiary numbers
Account numbers
Certificate/license numbers
Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers
Device identifiers and serial numbers
Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)
Internet Protocol (IP) address numbers
Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints
Full face photographic images and any similar images
Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code that identifies a
person or his or her PHI
A limited data set is still PHI; therefore, a covered entity must enter into a data use
agreement with the organization that receives it. 33 The data use agreement specifies
how the PHI in the limited data set will be protected.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Uses and Disclosures That Require Authorization
A covered entity must get people’s written consent in order to use or disclose their
PHI in ways that are not expressly allowed under the Privacy Rule. 34 Under the Rule,
written consent is called an authorization. These are very specific documents that
allow PHI to be shared. A written authorization is required for many purposes, such
as to disclose psychotherapy notes and to use PHI in marketing materials.
A covered entity must get an authorization before it discloses PHI if a permitted
use or disclosure does not apply. This comes into play in many ways. A covered
entity needs an authorization to share a person’s PHI with an employer for
employment purposes. Even if a person asks the covered entity to provide this
information to an employer, he or she must sign an authorization. A parent will need
to sign an authorization on behalf of his or her minor child to have the covered entity
disclose PHI to the child’s school. This might be required to allow children to
participate in some school activities such as sporting events.
NOTE
De-identified data is data that has been stripped of all information that could identify an individual. De-
identified data is not PHI. The HHS has issued guidance about how to de-identify data.
FYI
HIPAA uses the term authorization to distinguish between consent to use or disclose PHI and other types
of consent that are used in the healthcare industry. For example, informed consent, written consent from a
patient to undergo a medical treatment, is a basic rule in health care. This type of consent explains the
risks and benefits of treatment. When patients sign informed consent documents, they are agreeing to
undergo the treatments specified. These forms are very different from a Privacy Rule authorization that
allows PHI to be shared. When people consent to sharing their PHI, they show their consent by signing an
authorization. This eliminates confusion among different types of documents used in the healthcare
industry.
The Privacy Rule forbids a covered entity from requiring a person to sign an
authorization in order to receive healthcare treatment. The covered entity cannot
condition benefit eligibility on signing an authorization. This is so that covered
entities cannot force people to sign authorizations under pressure by withholding
needed care.
The Privacy Rule requires authorizations to contain specific terms. It also states
situations in which an authorization is defective. A defective authorization is not valid.
Authorizations are defective if the expiration date stated in the authorization has
passed. They are also invalid if they are not filled out completely, or if a person has
revoked them.
An authorization must be in plain language. This means that it should not contain
any legal terms or other terms that are hard for a person to understand. A valid
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.authorization must contain the following elements: 35
A specific and meaningful description of the PHI that will be used or disclosed
Identification of the people who are allowed to make the requested use or
disclosure
Identification of the people who will receive the use or disclosure
A clear description of the reason for the requested use or disclosure
The date that the authorization will expire
The signature of the person and the date
The Privacy Rule requires that covered entities provide people with a copy of any
authorizations that they sign.
Minimum Necessary Rule
A covered entity is permitted to use and disclose some types of PHI without an
authorization. These situations were described earlier in this chapter. However, this
does not mean that it should always disclose the entire allowable amount of PHI
available to it. Any time a covered entity discloses PHI, it must follow the minimum
necessary rule. 36 In other words, it may disclose only the amount of PHI absolutely
necessary. The amount disclosed must be able to satisfy the reason why the
information is being used or disclosed, but no more. Covered entities must create
internal processes and procedures to make sure that employees access only the
amount of PHI needed to do their jobs.
NOTE
The Privacy Rule minimum necessary rule is similar to the general information security principle of need to
know. Only the information needed to carry out a function or activity should be disclosed.
A covered entity must use professional judgment and make reasonable efforts to
limit its use or disclosure of PHI. For instance, a healthcare provider should not
disclose a person’s entire medical record if only a portion of it is needed to be
responsive to a request.
There are some exceptions to this rule. 37 Uses or disclosures of PHI made by a
healthcare provider for treatment purposes are not subject to the minimum
necessary rule. It also does not apply to disclosures made to people about their own
PHI, or to uses or disclosures made when a person specifically authorizes the use or
disclosure. It also does not apply to uses or disclosures required by law or made to
HHS for its complaint investigation function.
Other Individual Rights Under the Privacy Rule
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.The Privacy Rule gives people additional rights regarding their PHI. These rights
help people make sure that their PHI is used properly.
Amendments of PHI. A person has the right to ask that a covered entity amend the
person’s PHI. 38 However, a covered entity does not have to correct data in the
record. Instead, it can include the amendment in the record. That way the integrity of
the record is maintained. Other entities that might rely on the unamended PHI to the
person’s detriment must be notified of the amendment. The covered entity that
makes this amendment also must notify the other entities, as well as anyone else the
individual specifies.
A covered entity must respond to a request to amend PHI within 60 days. 39 That
time can be extended for 30 more days if the covered entity notifies the requestor in
writing. A covered entity may choose not to amend PHI for some reason. For
example, a covered entity does not have to amend PHI if it did not create the PHI
that is in question. It also does not have to amend PHI if it determines that the PHI in
the record is accurate and complete.
If an entity chooses to deny a request to amend PHI, then it must issue a written
denial notice to the person who requested the amendment. 40 The denial notice must
contain the basis for the denial, as well as a statement of the person’s right to
disagree with the denial. A person may submit a statement of disagreement to the
covered entity, which may prepare a rebuttal to the person’s statement of
disagreement. If a request for amendment is denied, the covered entity must include
the following in the person’s record:
Identification of the PHI that is under dispute
A copy of the person’s request to amend the PHI
A copy of the covered entity’s denial of the request
A copy of the person’s statement of disagreement
A copy of the covered entity’s rebuttal statement
All of this information must be included in future uses or disclosures of the PHI that is
under dispute.
Accounting of Disclosures. Covered entities must keep records of how they
disclose a person’s PHI. Under the Privacy Rule, a person has the right to receive an
accounting of how the covered entity has used or disclosed the person’s PHI. 41
People have the right to get an accounting of disclosures of PHI made in the 6 years
before the date of their request. They also can request accountings for shorter
periods.
A covered entity does not have to account for every PHI disclosure that it makes.
The Privacy Rule states that some kinds of disclosures do not have to be included in
an accounting. However, any disclosure not specifically excluded must be included
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.and tracked. TABLE 6-1 compares different types of disclosures.
TABLE 6-1 Different Types of Disclosures
DISCLOSURES THAT ARE NOT TRACKED
DISCLOSURES THAT MUST BE TRACKED
Disclosures made to carry out treatment, payment,
and healthcare activities* Disclosures to HHS for its compliance functions
Disclosures to individuals Disclosures required by law
Disclosures made after an authorization is received Disclosures required for public health activities
Incidental disclosures Disclosures made to report abuse
Disclosures where the person had the opportunity to
opt-out Disclosures for judicial and administrative
proceedings (in response to subpoenas and court
orders)
Disclosures for national security or intelligence
purposes Disclosures for law enforcement purposes
Disclosures to correctional institutions or to law
enforcement officials having custody of an inmate Disclosures for research purposes (unless
authorized or made via a limited data set)
Disclosures that are part of a limited data set Disclosures to the public health agencies
Disclosures made more than 6 years before the date
of the person’s request for an accounting Disclosures to avert a threat of serious injury
Disclosures made by mistake (inadvertent
disclosures)
Any other disclosures not specifically excluded by
the Privacy Rule
*The HITECH Act has different tracking requirements for disclosures made from an EHR.
A covered entity must provide a person a first accounting in a 12-month period at
no charge. 42 If he or she requests more than one accounting in that period, then the
covered entity can charge a reasonable fee for each subsequent request. However,
the covered entity must inform the person that it intends to charge a fee for an extra
accounting and give the person a chance to withdraw or change the request in order
to avoid the fee.
A covered entity must respond to a request for an accounting in writing within 60
days. 43 This period can be extended 30 days with notice to the person who has
requested the accounting. When it responds, the covered entity must include the
following information:
Date of disclosure
Name of recipient
Description of the PHI disclosed
Reason for the disclosure, or a copy of the request for the disclosure
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.The HITECH Act made changes to the accounting of disclosures requirement for
EPHI. These changes apply to cases where a covered entity maintains an EHR for a
person. An EHR is an electronic record or healthcare information created by a
covered entity. If a covered entity keeps an EHR, then it must provide a person with
an accounting of the treatment, payment, and healthcare operation disclosures
made from that EHR. 44 This expanded requirement applies only to disclosures from
an EHR. In cases involving an EHR, a person has a right to get an accounting only
for the 3 years before the date of the request. In 2011 HHS proposed additional
regulations that address how disclosures from an EHR should be accounted for. The
proposed regulations were withdrawn in 2018. At the time of this writing, new
regulations had not been proposed.
Privacy Notices
Covered entities must inform people about their privacy practices. 45 The Privacy
Rule requires covered entities to let people know how they use and disclose their
PHI. It does this in a privacy policy. A covered entity must use and disclose PHI only
in the ways described by its privacy policy.
A covered entity must use plain language to draft its notice, so that an average
person is able to understand the notice. The Privacy Rule requires the notice to
include specific parts:
A title that reads: “THIS NOTICE DESCRIBES HOW MEDICAL INFORMATION
ABOUT YOU MAY BE USED AND DISCLOSED AND HOW YOU CAN GET
ACCESS TO THIS INFORMATION. PLEASE REVIEW IT CAREFULLY.” The
covered entity must display this header in prominent type.
A description of how the covered entity may use and disclose a person’s PHI. It
should include examples of disclosures that the entity makes for treatment,
payment, and healthcare operations. This description should state when the
covered entity is allowed to use or disclose PHI without a person’s consent, and
when the covered entity must have consent.
Incidental and Inadvertent Disclosures
The difference between incidental and inadvertent disclosures of PHI is important to understand. Even
though they sound similar, they are very different.
Incidental disclosures are permitted disclosures under the Privacy Rule. Covered entities do not have to
track these types of disclosures. An incidental disclosure can result from any use or disclosure that is
allowed under the Privacy Rule. They are allowed so long as a covered entity implements safeguards to
limit the amount of PHI exposed though an incidental disclosure.
Examples of incidental disclosures include:
A customer at a pharmacy hears the pharmacist quietly discussing a medication with another
customer. This is an incidental disclosure because it occurs during an activity that is allowed under
the Privacy Rule. The permitted activity is the covered entity’s treatment activities.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.A patient going to a hospital to pay a bill briefly views another patient’s payment information on the
billing clerk’s computer monitor. The first patient can see this information only briefly before the clerk
accesses the patient’s own record. This is an incidental disclosure because it is a result of the
covered entity’s permitted payment activities.
Covered entities must take steps to limit incidental disclosures. This includes speaking quietly when
discussing conditions with patients and their families. It also includes shielding monitors from public view
as much as possible.
Inadvertent disclosures are different. Inadvertent disclosures are disclosures that are not allowed under
the Privacy Rule. Covered entities must track inadvertent disclosures. They also must provide an
accounting of these types of disclosures if a person requests it. These disclosures happen by mistake. An
example would be if a covered entity discloses PHI without a valid authorization when one was needed.
Under the HITECH Act, some types of inadvertent disclosures could even be considered an impermissible
data breach that requires further action.
A description of the person’s rights with respect to his or her PHI. This section
should also include information on how a person can exercise these rights. The
covered entity must include information about its complaint processes, as well as
information about the person’s right to complain to HHS.
A statement that the covered entity is required by law to maintain the privacy of
PHI. This statement must include the entity’s legal duties with respect to PHI.
The contact information of a person the individual can contact to ask additional
questions about the covered entity’s privacy notice.
A covered entity’s privacy policy must contain an effective date. The covered entity
must revise and redistribute its notice any time it makes a material change to the
notice. Covered entities must make the notice available to anyone who asks for it. It
also must make the notice available on any website that it maintains.
NOTE
Many of the elements that are required in the Notice of Privacy Practices contain portions of the fair
information practice principles.
Different types of covered entities have additional rules to follow when giving their
privacy notices to individuals. 46 For example, health plans must distribute their
privacy notices to people when they enroll in the health plan. They also must make
sure that plan participants receive a copy of the notice at least once every 3 years.
NOTE
A material change is a change in an organization’s operating practices that is significant. Material changes
can affect how people understand their rights or interact with an organization.
In some cases, the Privacy Rule does not require healthcare clearinghouses to
develop a notice of privacy practices; for example, if the only PHI that they create or
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.receive is as a business associate of another covered entity.
Healthcare providers have additional rules to follow for distributing their notices to
individuals. Providers must give the notice to a person no later than when they first
provide services to that person. They also must make a good-faith effort to get the
person’s written acknowledgment of receipt of the notice. A provider must document
a person’s receipt of the notice if it cannot gain a receipt from the person. In
emergencies, the healthcare provider must provide its notice of privacy practices to a
patient as soon as it is reasonable. A healthcare provider must also post its notice in
a clear and prominent location where patients can read the notice. Covered entities
must retain copies of privacy notices that they distribute. They must also retain
written acknowledgments.
Administrative Requirements
A covered entity has administrative duties under the Privacy Rule. 47 For example, it
must designate a privacy official who is responsible for developing the covered
entity’s privacy policies and procedures. HHS allows a covered entity to scope its
privacy policies and programs to its size and structure. This allows covered entities
some discretion when they create their programs. Covered entities that are large
with complex structures must develop policies appropriate for that structure. Smaller
entities are not held to the same standard, and therefore must develop their own
policies.
The covered entity must also designate a person to receive consumer privacy
complaints. This person handles complaints about the entity’s own privacy policies,
as well as consumer complaints about the Privacy Rule. This person also answers
questions about the entity’s privacy notice. The privacy official often serves as this
contact person.
Covered entities must create policies and procedures to protect the privacy of all
PHI. 48 These policies include destroying PHI properly. They can also include
requirements that paper medical charts be secured in locked file cabinets. This
requirement is similar to the HIPAA Security Rule. However, the Security Rule
applies only to EPHI.
NOTE
The Security Rule contains document retention requirements. Covered entities must maintain their
Security Rule documentation for 6 years after it is created. They also must maintain old documents for 6
years after they are retired. The 6-year time limit starts to run on whichever date (creation or retirement) is
later.
Covered entities must train all their employees—even part-time employees,
volunteers, and interns—on the Privacy Rule and its privacy policies and
procedures. A covered entity also must have a discipline policy for workers who
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.violate the Privacy Rule. This is called a sanctions policy.
FYI
HHS relies on National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) guidelines to specify how PHI should
be secured during storage and transmission. PHI is considered secured if a covered entity encrypts it
according to these guidelines. The HHS guidance can be found at https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-
professionals/breach-notification/guidance/index.html.
Breach Notification Provisions
The Privacy Rule requires covered entities, including business associates, to
mitigate an unauthorized use or disclosure of PHI. 49 Before the HITECH Act, a
covered entity did not have to notify individuals that their PHI was used or disclosed
in an unauthorized manner. However, the HITECH Act now requires them to do so. It
creates notification requirements that covered entities must follow in the event of a
breach of unsecured PHI. 50 Both covered entities and business associates must
follow these rules.
A breach is any impermissible use or disclosure of unsecured PHI that
compromises the security or privacy of the PHI. Any unauthorized use or disclosure
is presumed to be a breach under the law. In some cases, a covered entity might be
able to show that there is a low probability that PHI was compromised. If it can do
that, then the breach notification requirements do not apply.
To show that there is a low probability that PHI has been compromised, a
covered entity must engage in a risk assessment. To conduct the risk assessment, a
covered entity must review:
The PHI that was involved in the breach—Is the PHI involved very sensitive? Is
it more likely to lead to identify theft?
Who used or received the PHI—Does the entity know who used the PHI? Was it
an impermissible use or disclosure?
Was the PHI actually acquired?—Was the PHI involved actually viewed? Was is
downloaded by the unauthorized individual?
Have risks been mitigated?—If the entity knows who used the PHI, can it get
assurances that they will not disclose or use the data further? Can the entity
ensure that PHI has been destroyed?
The covered entity must weigh all these factors. It also must conduct this risk
assessment in good faith. As noted earlier, if the risk assessment demonstrates that
there is a low probability that the PHI has been compromised, then the breach
notification requirements do not apply. 51
The HITECH breach notification provisions apply to unsecured PHI, which refers
to PHI that is not protected by a technology that renders it unusable or unreadable.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Unsecured PHI is PHI that is not encrypted or properly destroyed. PHI must be
encrypted through a process that is approved by HHS to be considered secure. In
April 2009, HHS issued guidance on what technologies were acceptable to encrypt
PHI. It will update this guidance yearly.
Unsecured PHI includes PHI that is not disposed of properly. PHI is considered
unsecured during destruction if it is still readable or recoverable after disposal. PHI
that is shredded or completely destroyed is disposed of properly.
NOTE
Neither HIPAA nor the HITECH Act provides a private cause of action. This means that neither law gives
people a right to sue a covered entity that wrongfully uses their PHI. An individual would have to use a
different legal theory, such as negligence, to sue a covered entity that wrongfully uses his or her PHI.
Covered entities must provide notice to people who are affected by a breach of
unsecured PHI. 52 These are the people whose PHI was disclosed, or potentially
disclosed, because of the breach. The covered entity must notify them no later than
60 days after it discovers the breach. 53 A breach is discovered on the first day that
the covered entity knows about the breach. Individuals must be notified about the
situation without “unreasonable delay.” This means that a covered entity must notify
individuals as soon as it can reasonably do so. A covered entity may delay
notification if a law enforcement official requests it.
Any notice to an individual must include:
A complete description of what happened
A description of the PHI involved
A description of what the covered entity is doing to mitigate the breach
Steps the person should take to protect himself or herself from harm such as
identity theft
Contact information for the covered entity 54
The HITECH Act also specifies the method for notifying people of a breach of their
unsecured PHI. The default way to provide notice is via first-class mail. However,
there are other ways to provide notice in some circumstances. For example, a
covered entity can provide notice via email if the individual has agreed to receive
communications by email. If the breach involves more than 500 people, then the
covered entity must also immediately notify HHS about the breach, 55 as well as local
media so news outlets can help inform people. All covered entities must submit
annual reports to the HHS about breaches involving fewer than 500 people.
Main Requirements of the Security Rule
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.HHS published the Security Rule in February 2003. This information security rule
requires covered entities to use security safeguards that protect the confidentiality,
integrity, and availability of electronic protected health information (EPHI). EPHI
is patient health information that is computer based. Covered entities were required
to comply with the Rule by April 20, 2005.
Similar to the Privacy Rule, the Security Rule was the first time the U.S.
government stated federal protections for EPHI. Under the Rule, covered entities
must protect all EPHI that they create, receive, maintain, or transmit from reasonably
anticipated threats. 56 They also must guard against uses or disclosures of EPHI that
are not allowed by the Privacy Rule.
Electronic Health Records and Personal Health Records
In January 2005, President Bush called for the creation of a nationwide network of EHRs within 10 years. An
EHR refers to government-endorsed technologies that allow healthcare providers to store, retrieve, and share
medical information. The goal of an EHR is to make paper medical records obsolete.
The HITECH Act allocates $19.2 billon to promote the adoption of EHRs. Beginning in 2011, healthcare
professionals who used approved EHR technologies were eligible for some types of incentives to help cover
the cost of adopting EHR technologies. Healthcare providers that moved too slowly to adopt EHR did not
receive the incentives.
An EHR is different from a personal health record (PHR). PHRs are health records that are compiled and
maintained by a person or other non-medical provider third party, whereas EHRs are compiled and
maintained by healthcare providers. A PHR typically refers to individual-compiled health records in an
electronic format. People can compile and store this information on their computers. They also can use
applications and tools offered by third parties. Many health insurance companies give their members access
to tools that allow them to compile PHRs. These tools and PHRs are specific to the health insurance plan.
Covered entities must create policies and procedures to comply with the Security
Rule. 57 They must review their documents on a regular basis and update them as
needed, as well as provide training to their employees. They also must make
security program documents available to employees in printed manuals or on
websites. A covered entity also must have a sanctions policy to discipline workers
who violate the Security Rule.
The Security Rule allows covered entities flexibility in creating their overall
security program. The Rule does not require covered entities to use specific types of
technology. In creating their program, covered entities may think about:
The size and complexity of the entity
Its technical infrastructure, hardware, and software security resources
The costs of security measures
The potential risks to EPHI 58
Safeguards and Implementation Specifications
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.The Security Rule requires covered entities to use information security principles to
protect EPHI through the use of administrative, physical, and technical safeguards.
The Rule contains instructions on each safeguard, as well as standards that must be
implemented for each safeguard. These standards include a list of items, called
implementation specifications, that a covered entity must put into practice.
There are some implementation specifications that a covered entity must
implement, which are called required specifications. Other specifications are
addressable. Covered entities have more discretion when considering addressable
specifications. For these specifications, it must assess whether that control is
reasonable and appropriate in its environment. 59 If it is, then the covered entity must
use it.
If an addressable specification is not reasonable and appropriate, the covered
entity does not have to use it. However, it must document why the specification was
not appropriate. It also must implement an equivalent control, which should
accomplish the goal of the addressable specification.
Administrative Safeguards. Half of the safeguards required by the Security Rule
are administrative in nature. These safeguards are actions, policies, and procedures
that a covered entity must implement in order to follow the Security Rule. 60 There are
nine different administrative requirements. A covered entity must implement the
following standards:
Security management process
Assigned security responsibility
Workforce security
Information access management
Security awareness and training
Security incident procedures
Contingency plan
Evaluation
Business associate contracts 61
The security management process standard guides a covered entity in creating its
security program. It has four required implementation specifications. To comply with
this standard, a covered entity must conduct a risk analysis and engage in risk
management. It must also create a sanction policy and review information system
activity.
Risk analysis is used to assess the vulnerabilities, threats, and risks that could
harm EPHI. Risk management is the process of implementing controls to reduce
risk. Information system activity review is the process of reviewing system logs and
records. Covered entities must review them to make sure that EPHI is being used
properly.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Covered entities are required to name an official responsible for Security Rule
compliance because of the assigned security responsibility standard. This standard
is similar to the Privacy Rule provision that requires covered entities to designate a
privacy official. The privacy and security officials do not have to be the same person.
NOTE
Risk analysis and risk management are standard information security concepts. HHS has issued guidance
on risk analysis and assessment under the Security Rule. You can learn more at
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/security/guidance/guidance-risk-analysis/.
Under the workforce security standard, covered entities must implement need-to-
know policies for EPHI access and ensure that all employees have appropriate
access to EPHI. They also must ensure that employees without proper authority are
not able to access EPHI. There are three addressable specifications in this standard.
To the extent that it is appropriate for its operations, the covered entity must
implement authorization and supervision procedures. It must also implement
workforce clearance and termination procedures.
Each of these specifications helps to ensure proper access to EPHI. The
authorization and supervision procedures are used to make sure that an individual
user has the authority to use EPHI in certain ways. Under the workforce clearance
specification, a covered entity must create procedures to confirm that an employee’s
access to EPHI is correct. The termination procedures specification requires covered
components to terminate employee access to EPHI when an employee leaves a
covered entity.
The information access management standard is closely related to the workforce
security standard. It requires covered entities to create policies to access EPHI that
must be consistent with the Privacy Rule. The standard has one required and two
addressable implementation specifications.
The security awareness and training standard requires covered entities to create
training and awareness programs for all members of its workforce. This standard has
four addressable specifications. Where appropriate, the covered entity must
implement password management procedures. It must also create logon monitoring
procedures. Other procedures must protect against malicious software. The entity
also should provide security updates to its workforce.
Under the security incident procedures standard, covered entities must
implement policies to respond to security incidents. This standard has one required
implementation specification. The covered entity must identify security incidents and
respond to them. It also must attempt to mitigate the harm caused by security
incidents, as well as document security incidents and their outcomes. In some
cases, a security incident under the Security Rule leads to unauthorized use or
disclosure of PHI under the Privacy Rule. In these cases, the Privacy Rule might
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.require covered entities to notify the individuals affected by the breach.
The contingency plan standard requires covered entities to develop policies to
recover access to EPHI in the event of an outage or disaster. This standard contains
three required and two addressable specifications. It also requires covered entities to
prepare data backup, disaster recovery, and emergency operation plans. Together,
the plans state how an organization backs up and restores its EPHI. The emergency
operations plan requires covered entities to protect EPHI when it is operating in
emergency mode. Where reasonable, the covered entity must also create
procedures to test and review its contingency plans.
NOTE
Under the Security Rule, a security incident is unauthorized access or use of information. It can be
successful unauthorized access or just attempted unauthorized access. Incidents also include interference
with the operation of information systems. 62
The evaluation standard requires the covered entity to review its security
safeguards program. It must regularly review changes to its information systems and
practices and make sure that its safeguards still protect EPHI. The covered entity
can perform this evaluation on its own. It also can hire external organizations to
conduct this review.
The business associate contracts standard requires covered entities to make
sure that their business associates protect EPHI. Covered entities must enter into
written contracts with any organizations that use EPHI on their behalf. These are
called business associates agreements. Business associates agreements are
required under both the Privacy and Security Rules. A covered entity must identify all
of its business associates, as well as make sure that it has contracts will all of them.
TIP
Remember that under the Security Rule, a covered entity must apply an addressable and appropriate
implementation specification if it is reasonable. A covered entity must document why it does not implement
one of these types of specifications. It must then implement an equivalent control if possible.
TABLE 6-2 summarizes the administrative safeguards required by the Security
Rule. It also includes a summary of required and addressable implementation
specifications.
TABLE 6-2 Administrative Safeguards
SAFEGUARD
REQUIRED SPECIFICATIONS
Risk Analysis
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.
ADDRESSABLE
SPECIFICATIONSSecurity Management Process Risk Management
Sanction Policy
Information System Activity
Review
Assigned Security Responsibility Required
Authorization and/or Supervision
Workforce Clearance Procedure
Termination Procedures
Workforce Security
Information Access Management
Isolating Healthcare
Clearinghouse Function
Access Authorization
Access Establishment and
Modification
Security Reminders
Protection From Malicious
Software
Logon Monitoring
Password Management
Security Awareness and Training
Security Incident Procedures Response and Reporting
Contingency Plan Data Backup Plan
Disaster Recovery Plan
Emergency Mode Operation Plan
Evaluation Required
Business Associate Contracts
and Other Arrangements Required
Testing and Revision Procedure
Applications and Data Criticality
Analysis
Physical Safeguards. Physical safeguards are controls put in place to protect a
covered entity’s physical resources. 63 These measures protect information systems,
equipment, and buildings from environmental threats. The Security Rule contains
four physical security standards that a covered entity must put into practice: 64
Facility access controls
Workstation use
Workstation security
Device and media controls
Under the facility access controls standard, covered entities must implement policies
that limit physical access to their computer systems, as well as access to the
buildings where these systems are located. Only authorized individuals should be
allowed to access these systems and facilities. This standard has four addressable
implementation specifications.
Where appropriate, the covered entity must create access contingency plans.
These plans allow access to facilities and systems during emergencies. A covered
entity also must create a facility security plan, which is designed to protect systems
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.and buildings from unauthorized access, tampering, and theft. When it seems
appropriate, covered entities must create access control and validation procedures,
as well as measures to manage visitor access. They also should document repairs
and modifications to a facility.
The Security Rule contains two required standards related to workstation
security. Neither standard has implementation specifications. In the workstation use
standard, a covered entity must make sure that employees use workstations
properly. This means that it should review the applications used on workstations, as
well as whether those applications introduce security risks that could harm EPHI. For
example, a covered entity might decide that it is too risky to allow workstations used
to access EPHI to connect to the internet. The covered entity must look at
workstation use for both on-site and off-site locations.
NOTE
Under the Security Rule, a workstation is a computing device as well as any electronic media used by or
around the device. Examples include a laptop or desktop computer or any similar device. 65
According to the workstation security standard, covered entities must implement
physical safeguards for workstations that access EPHI to ensure that access to the
workstation is restricted to authorized users. For example, a covered entity might
protect workstations by keeping them in areas that only authorized employees are
allowed to access.
Under the device and media controls standard, a covered entity must track
information systems containing EPHI in and out of a facility. They also must track
system movement within a facility. This standard has two required and two
addressable implementation specifications.
Under this standard, a covered entity is required to create media disposal and
media reuse policies. Covered entities must make sure that EPHI is destroyed or
made unusable before the covered entity disposes of electronic media. The process
for accomplishing this is described in a media disposal policy. A covered entity must
also create media reuse policies, which state that EPHI must be removed from
electronic media that is going to be made available for reuse. These policies must
take into account media reuse within a covered entity. They also should address
media reuse outside of a covered entity.
TABLE 6-3 summarizes the physical safeguards required by the Security Rule. It
also includes a summary of required and addressable implementation specifications.
TABLE 6-3 Physical Safeguards
SAFEGUARD
REQUIRED SPECIFICATIONS
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.
ADDRESSABLE
SPECIFICATIONSContingency Operations
Facility Security Plan
Access Control and Validation
Procedures
Maintenance Records
Facility Access Controls
Workstation Use Required
Workstation Security Required
Device and Media Controls Disposal
Media Reuse
Accountability
Data Backup and Storage
Technical Safeguards. Technical safeguards are applied in the hardware and
software of an information system. 66 The Security Rule contains five technical
security standards. 67 It does not require that any specific type of technology be used
to follow the Rule. A covered entity must implement the following standards:
Access controls
Audit controls
Integrity controls
Person or entity authentication
Transmission security
The access control standard requires covered entities to use access control rules to
limit authorized access to systems that store EPHI. The implementation
specifications require covered entities to assign unique usernames to anyone who
uses its systems. They also must create procedures to access EPHI in an
emergency. Addressable specifications include using automatic logoff processes that
end an electronic session after a period of inactivity. A covered entity also should
encrypt EPHI. Together, these controls limit access to EPHI.
The audit controls standard requires covered entities to review activity in
information systems that store or use EPHI. The entity must decide what audit
controls it needs to implement to protect its EPHI. Audit controls are then used to
look for unauthorized access.
The integrity controls standard requires covered entities to create policies to
protect EPHI from improper modification or destruction. This is an important control
to protect EPHI. Healthcare providers rely on EPHI to treat patients, and EPHI that
has been improperly modified can put a patient in danger. This standard has one
addressable specification. When it is appropriate, covered entities must authenticate
EPHI. These electronic mechanisms are used to make sure that EPHI has not been
improperly changed or destroyed.
Covered entities are required to create procedures to verify that a person or
entity trying to access EPHI is who he or she claims to be. This is the person or
entity authentication standard. Authentication credentials are used to ensure that a
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.person is who he or she claims to be. These credentials include passwords, tokens,
smart cards, and biometric credentials.
The transmission security standard requires covered entities to guard against
unauthorized access to EPHI during transmission. A covered entity must review how
it transmits EPHI and determine if there is a risk of unauthorized access. This
standard includes two addressable specifications. Where appropriate, the covered
entity must implement security measures that protect EPHI from being modified
during transmission. It also must encrypt EPHI during transmission if appropriate.
TABLE 6-4 summarizes the technical safeguards required by the Security Rule.
It also includes a summary of required and addressable implementation
specifications.
TABLE 6-4 Technical Safeguards
SAFEGUARD
REQUIRED SPECIFICATIONS
Access Control Unique User Identification
Emergency Access Procedure
Audit Controls Required
Required
Transmission Security
Automatic Logoff
Encryption and Decryption
Mechanism to Authenticate
Electronic Protected Health
Information
Integrity
Person or Entity Authentication
ADDRESSABLE
SPECIFICATIONS
Integrity Controls
Encryption
The Security Rule and safeguards requirements are designed to protect all sorts
of EPHI. HHS recognizes that sometimes covered entities might need more
guidance as technology quickly evolves. For example, HHS has issued guidance to
help covered entities secure mobile devices. It has also issued guidance to help
covered entities securely access remote EPHI.
FYI
Covered entities have great incentive to encrypt EPHI. This incentive exists even though many Security
Rule implementation specifications do not require encryption. The incentive exists because the breach
notification requirement of the Privacy Rule does not apply to the unauthorized use or disclosure of
encrypted EPHI. A covered entity thus saves itself from this requirement if it encrypts its EPHI.
Oversight
HHS oversees compliance with the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules. It delegates
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.this function to the Office for Civil Rights (OCR), which enforces both rules. It is also
responsible for protecting people from discrimination in social services programs.
The OCR has enforced the Privacy Rule since the 2003 compliance date. It
began enforcing the Security Rule in July 2009. Before that, the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) enforced the Security Rule. CMS is also a
part of HHS.
The HITECH Act changed many of the oversight and enforcement functions for
HIPAA and required HHS to improve how it enforced the Privacy and Security Rules.
To do this, the HHS secretary delegated Security Rule enforcement to the OCR. This
change eliminated duplicate rule enforcement. HHS hopes to be more efficient by
having one office enforce both rules.
The OCR can fine covered entities that do not comply with the Privacy and
Security Rules. The maximum fine for a Security or Privacy Rule violation is $1.5
million per year, which is annually adjusted for inflation. 69 Minimum fines range from
$100 to $50,000 per violation. The penalty amount is determined by reviewing the
nature of the violation. The OCR also will weigh how the covered entity responded to
the violation when it determines a fine.
A person may be subject to criminal liability if he or she obtains or discloses PHI
in violation of HIPAA. The HITECH Act clarifies that any person who wrongfully
obtains or discloses PHI can be held criminally responsible. This includes a covered
entity, its employees, or any other person. A person must know that his or her
conduct is wrongful under HIPAA. The U.S. Department of Justice handles HIPAA
criminal violations.
The HITECH Act allows states to enforce HIPAA compliance. States did not have
this authority before. State attorneys general can stop covered entities from
engaging in practices that harm state residents and compromise their PHI. They also
can recover damages on behalf of state residents who are harmed by a covered
entity’s conduct. The first state to use this new enforcement power was Connecticut.
NOTE
HHS must bring an enforcement action against a noncompliant covered entity within 6 years of the date of
the violation. 70
FYI
In 2018 HHS investigated 32,770 cases related to the HIPAA Security and Privacy Rules. 68 A flowchart of
the OCR complaint process is available at http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/enforcement/process.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.The Role of State Laws Protecting Medical
Records
HIPAA sets the floor for PHI security and privacy protections. This means that states
are free to create laws and rules that provide more protections than HIPAA. Covered
entities have to comply with both laws. Generally speaking, the controlling law is
whichever law is stricter, or provides greater patient rights.
Any state law that is contrary to HIPAA is not allowed. A state law is contrary if it
is impossible for the covered entity to comply with both the state law and HIPAA. In
these situations, the state laws are preempted by HIPAA.
States enact many laws that may affect PHI. These laws can provide more rights
than allowed by HIPAA. For instance, in 2008 California enacted some of the
strictest patient privacy protections in the country. California’s laws specify harsh
penalties for providers caught snooping in patient medical records. California
healthcare providers must report privacy breaches more quickly than is specified in
HIPAA. The California law requires healthcare providers to notify people within 15
days of a breach of a patient’s medical information. 71
It is important to review both state law and federal law when reviewing questions
about the security and privacy of PHI. You must review both types of laws to make
sure that covered entities are appropriately protecting this information.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Case Studies and Examples
The following case studies show how the laws discussed in this chapter are used.
These case studies are real-world examples of how regulatory agencies apply laws
and rules to protect PHI.
OCR Enforcement Information
The OCR posts HIPAA Privacy and Security Rule enforcement news on its webpage,
as well as summaries of enforcement activities. It also posts monthly statistics about
its activities, as well as case examples and resolution agreements for HIPAA
violations.
The OCR enforcement activities webpage can be found at
https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/compliance-enforcement/index.html.
HIPAA and Federal Trade Communications Act
Sometimes an act can touch several compliance laws. In 2006, an Indianapolis,
Indiana, television news station conducted an investigative report on prescription
privacy. As part of its report, the news station looked at the contents of pharmacy
dumpsters to see if pharmacies properly disposed of patient information. It checked
the contents of unsecured, unlocked dumpsters. There was nothing stopping the
public from sifting through these dumpsters.
The news station reported that CVS pharmacies were throwing sensitive
personal information in the trash. CVS, one of the largest pharmacy retailers in the
United States, has more than 6,000 stores. The investigation found that CVS was
throwing away unredacted pill bottles that included patient names, addresses,
physician names, and the names of medication. CVS also threw away medication
instruction sheets containing personal information, as well as pharmacy receipts with
credit card and health insurance account numbers. All of this information was
unredacted PHI. Other media outlets reported that CVS stores across the United
States also were improperly disposing of PHI.
Information about the “Prescription Privacy” investigative report can be found at
https://www.wthr.com/article/news/investigations/13-investigates/part-one-
prescription-privacy/531-811d33f4-344c-4614-922d-a9e75a5fa1b4.
At the time, CVS’s privacy policy stated: “CVS/pharmacy wants you to know that
nothing is more central to our operations than maintaining the privacy of your health
information (‘Protected Health Information’ or ‘PHI’). PHI is information about you,
including basic information that may identify you and relates to your past, present, or
future health or condition and the dispensing of pharmaceutical products to you. We
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.take this responsibility very seriously.”
CVS disposal practices were investigated by the HHS and the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC). It was the first time that HHS and the FTC worked together on
an investigation. HHS, through the OCR, investigated CVS for violations of the
HIPAA Privacy Rule and found that CVS violated the Privacy Rule in several ways.
Its review indicated that CVS did not properly safeguard PHI during the media
disposal process. It also found that CVS did not properly train its employees on how
to dispose of PHI, or have a sanctions policy.
The FTC investigated CVS for violations of the FTC Act. It alleged that CVS
made false and deceptive statements about its privacy policies, promised customers
that it would protect unauthorized access to personal information, and did not
actually do this. These misleading types of statements are illegal under the FTC Act.
CVS responded that there was no verification of the media reports. However, it
settled charges with the FTC and HHS to resolve the cases. The FTC consent
agreement required CVS to create a comprehensive information security program to
protect the personal information that CVS collects from consumers and employees.
The order also required CVS to get an independent audit of its security program
every 2 years until 2029. In addition, CVS may not make any misrepresentations
about the company’s security practices.
The FTC complaint and consent agreement can be found at
http://www.ftc.gov/enforcement/cases-and-proceedings/cases/2009/06/matter-cvs-
caremark-corporation-corporation. (Look for the February 18, 2009, entries.)
Under the HHS resolution agreement, CVS agreed to pay $2.25 million to settle
all claims. It also agreed to follow a corrective action plan that required it to create
policies to comply with the HIPAA Privacy Rule. To do so, it must create policies and
procedures to safeguard PHI during disposal and establish an employee training
program. CVS also must create an employee sanctions policy to discipline
employees who fail to follow the Privacy Rule. The HHS resolution agreement also
requires independent review of CVS compliance. CVS must be reviewed each year.
The agreement requires 3 years of monitoring. The HHS resolution agreement and
corrective action plan can be found at
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/enforcement/examples/cvsresolutionagreement.html
NOTE
An HHS resolution agreement is similar to an FTC consent order. Both are settlement agreements.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.CHAPTER SUMMARY
Personal health information is one of the most sensitive types of confidential
information. Personal health information is no longer limited to paper files;
today, this type of information is often stored in electronic form. However, no
matter what its form, this information must be protected. Healthcare
providers must take steps to ensure its privacy and security.
They are required to do so by both federal and state laws, and face fines and
other penalties for failing to protect this information.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Authorization
Business associates
Covered entity
Disclosure
Discovery
Electronic protected health information (EPHI)
Medical identity theft
Minimum necessary rule
Private cause of action
Protected health information (PHI)
Use
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.CHAPTER 6 ASSESSMENT
1. An addressable implementation specification must be used if it is _______.
2. What is the maximum fine for a single violation of the HIPAA Privacy or Security
Rule?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
$100
$1,500
$1 million
$1.5 million
It is unlimited.
3. Covered entities must notify affected individuals of a breach within ________
days.
4. HIPAA limits the preexisting condition waiting period to ________ months.
5. What conditions must be met to be considered a healthcare provider under
HIPAA?
A.
B.
C.
D.
Provide healthcare services to a person.
Conduct standard transactions electronically.
Handle electronic transactions on a clearinghouse’s behalf.
Provide healthcare services to a person and conduct standard transactions
electronically.
E. None of these is correct.
6. A business associate is _______.
7. What term refers to how a covered entity shares PHI within the organization?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Disclosure
Discuss
Use
Handle
None of these is correct.
8. A covered entity must disclose PHI to a person’s family and friends in an
emergency.
A. True
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.B. False
9. A covered entity must respond to a person’s request to access PHI within
________ days.
10. Which uses and disclosures of PHI are allowed without a person’s consent?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Made for a person about his or her own PHI
Made for treatment, payment, and healthcare operations
Made for public safety and health activities
All of these are correct.
None of these is correct.
11. What term refers to how a covered entity shares PHI with other organizations?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Disclosure
Discuss
Use
Handle
None of these is correct.
12. What is the legal process used to gather evidence in a lawsuit?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Disclosure
Discovery
Forensics
Trial
None of these is correct.
13. Which entity enforces the HIPAA Privacy Rule?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
FDIC
FTC
OCR
CDC
None of these is correct.
14. Which rule is similar to the information security concept of need to know?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Use rule
Clearinghouse rule
Operations rule
Absolute rule
Minimum necessary rule
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.15. A HIPAA breach is a breach of ________ PHI.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.ENDNOTES
1. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, "Anthem Pays OCR $16
Million in Record HIPAA Settlement Following Largest U.S. Health Data Breach
in History." October 15, 2018.
https://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2018/10/15/anthem-pays-ocr-16-million-record-
hipaa-settlement-following-largest-health-data-breach-history.html (accessed
July 5, 2020).
2. Ponemon Institute, "Fifth Annual Study on Medical Identity Theft." February
2015. https://static.nationwide.com/static/2014_Medical_ID_Theft_Study.pdf?
r=65 (accessed July 5, 2020).
3. CBS News, “Cancer Patient Catches ID Thief,” November 6, 2004.
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/cancer-patient-catches-id-thief/ (accessed
March 1, 2020).
4. U.S. Department of Justice, “Leesburg Woman Sentenced To 48 Months In
Prison For Aggravated Identity Theft And Wire Fraud,” May 19, 2020.
https://www.justice.gov/usao-mdfl/pr/leesburg-woman-sentenced-48-months-
prison-aggravated-identity-theft-and-wire-fraud (accessed July 5, 2020).
5. National Library of Medicine, “Greek Medicine: The Hippocratic Oath,”
Translated by Michael North, 2002.
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/hmd/greek/greek_oath.html (accessed March 1, 2020).
6. Drug Abuse Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation Act (1980), U.S. Code
Vol. 42, sec. 290dd-2 (2020).
7. Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act of 2009
(HITECH Act), Pub. L. No. 111-5, 123 Stat. 226, codified at U.S. Code Vol. 42,
sec. 300jj et seq., and sec. 17901 et seq. (2018).
8. Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (1986), Pub. L. No. 99-272,
100 Stat. 82 (1986).
9. CNBC, “Consumer DNA Testing Has Hit a Lull—Here’s How It Could Capture
the Next Wave of Users,” August 25, 2019.
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/08/25/dna-tests-from-companies-like-23andme-
ancestry-see-sales-slowdown.html (accessed March 1, 2020).
10. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (1996), Pub. L. No. 104-191,
sec. 261.
11. Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (GINA), Pub. L. No. 110-233,
122 Stat. 881 (2008).
12. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 160.103.
13. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 160.103.
14. U.S. Code Vol. 42, sec. 1320d.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.104(b).
Federal Register 65, No. 250 at 82463 (background information).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.524(b).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.524(d).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.502(a)(2).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec.164.502.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.506(c).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.501.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.501.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.501.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.506(b).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.510.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.512.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.512(b).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.512(b).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.512(c).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.512(a).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.514(e)(2).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.514(e)(4).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.508.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.508(c)(1).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 165-502(b).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 165-502(b)(2).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.526.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.526(b)(2).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.526(d).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.528.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.528(c)(2).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.528(d).
HITECH Act, sec. 13405(c).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.520.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.520(c).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.530.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.530.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.530(f).
HITECH Act, sec. 13402.
Fed. Register No. 78, 5642-43 (January 25, 2013).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.404.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.404.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.404.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.408.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.306.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.316(b).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.306.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.306(d).
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.304.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.308.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.304.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.304.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.310.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.304.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.304.
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 164.312.
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, “Enforcement Results by Year,”
April 3, 2019. https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/compliance-
enforcement/data/enforcement-results-by-year/index.html (accessed March 1,
2020).
69. Federal Civil Penalties Inflation Adjustment Act Improvements Act of 2015,
enacted as part of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015, Public Law 114-74,
section 701, 129 Stat. 599 (Nov. 2, 2015).
70. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, sec. 160.414.
71. Health Facilities Data Breach, California Health and Safety Code sec. 1280.15.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-12 21:45:23.
