CHAPTER
9
State Laws Protecting Citizen
Information and Breach Notification
Laws
N THE UNITED STATES, there is currently no single comprehensive federal data
privacy or security law. Instead, the United States has enacted industry-specific
laws about security and privacy. These laws limit the use of personal information
based on the nature of the data.
I
State governments also have entered this regulatory arena. States create data
protection laws that are data specific. Many states have created laws to protect
health and financial information. They also might try to protect data in certain types
of records, such as motor vehicle records. In some ways, states are more
aggressive in trying to protect personal information than the federal government.
This chapter focuses on state data protection laws. It includes laws from different
states to give you an overview of the types of laws being passed to protect data. As
you encounter issues regarding the law, security, and privacy, you must consider the
impact of state laws and rules.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.Chapter 9 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
What the history is of state actions to protect personal information
What state breach notification laws are
What state data-specific security and privacy regulations are
What encryption regulations are
What data-disposal regulations are
What some case studies and examples are
Chapter 9 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe state approaches to protecting the security of personal
information
Describe laws that protect certain types of data
Describe state breach notification laws
Describe the differences between state breach notification laws
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.History of State Actions to Protect Personal
Information
States have created many laws to protect personal information. California, for
example, has worked hard to make laws that protect the security and privacy of its
residents’ data. It was this state’s breach notification laws and a breach at a large
corporation that led to the growth of data protection laws in many states.
ChoicePoint Data Breach
ChoicePoint was a data broker that merged public records, credit reports, and
demographic data to create individual consumer profiles, which it then sold to the
government and private companies. People used the profiles to conduct background
checks. ChoicePoint also sold profiles to insurance companies. It collected many
different types of personal information, such as names, addresses, and Social
Security numbers (SSNs). Its databases also included credit history and DNA
information.
In February 2005, ChoicePoint notified 35,000 California residents that their
personal data had been exposed in a data breach. California was the only state at
that time with a breach notification law, which applied to any business that stored
the personal data of California residents. The law required them to notify state
residents of any security breach involving their unencrypted personal information.
ChoicePoint said that it discovered the breach in late 2004 after law enforcement
officials contacted the company about an identity theft ring. ChoicePoint learned that
the criminals pretended to be its customers. In order to become a ChoicePoint
customer, applicants had to provide proof of a lawful reason for buying consumer
data. At the time of the breach, ChoicePoint had over 50,000 customers, ranging
from insurance companies to debt collectors.
NOTE
At the time of the data breach, news media reported that ChoicePoint had collected over 9 billion public
records on U.S. residents and had stored 250 terabytes of data.
ChoicePoint’s validation processes did not find the fake customers, some of
whom provided suspect documents to ChoicePoint. For example, multiple
businesses submitted documents with the same information. This should have
raised red flags for more review. ChoicePoint later found over 50 fake accounts that
had access to ChoicePoint’s databases. 1
At first ChoicePoint notified only California residents affected by the breach,
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.because it was the only state requiring such notification. However, 19 other states
were outraged. The state attorneys general wrote a letter to ChoicePoint demanding
that it alert all people affected by the breach. ChoicePoint later sent notification
letters to over 160,000 people. 2
In January 2006, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) investigated ChoicePoint,
alleging that ChoicePoint violated consumer privacy rights. It also charged the
company with violating federal laws. ChoicePoint settled with the FTC in December
of that year and paid $10 million in civil fines. 3
NOTE
ChoicePoint reported that it had many external audits after the 2005 breach. It was audited 80 times in the
24 months after the breach.
ChoicePoint also agreed to pay $5 million to fund a consumer relief program that
would pay people who were victims of identity theft because of the breach. The
agreement with the FTC also required ChoicePoint to create an information security
program. The company is required to get independent audits every year until 2026.
At the time, the ChoicePoint settlement was the largest in the FTC’s history.
NOTE
ChoicePoint was purchased by LexisNexis in 2008. To help protect consumer information, LexisNexis
offered customers a copy of their consumer file. However, individuals were limited in only requesting their
own file, and they needed to provide proof of identity to get a copy of the file. To learn more about this
service, you can visit https://consumer.risk.lexisnexis.com/.
In May 2007, ChoicePoint settled a multistate lawsuit over the breach. Forty-
three states entered the settlement agreement. As part of that agreement,
ChoicePoint promised to improve its process for verifying customers. It also agreed
to strengthen how it protects the data that it collects. ChoicePoint also agreed to pay
$500,000 to the states involved in the lawsuit. 4
ChoicePoint was on the FTC’s radar again in 2009, this time because of a 2008
security incident. ChoicePoint had changed some internal security controls, and the
changed controls failed to alert it that someone had unauthorized access to its data.
The wrongful access continued for about 30 days. During this time, the data of about
13,750 people—including SSNs—may have been disclosed.
NOTE
Illinois Governor Rod Blagojevich proposed the Personal Information Protection Act just days after the
ChoicePoint breach went public. The ChoicePoint breach affected about 5,000 Illinois residents. The Act,
which became Illinois’s breach notification law, took effect January 1, 2006.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.The FTC alleged that the 2008 incident was a violation of the 2006 agreement.
Therefore, ChoicePoint agreed to additional security requirements, such as
strengthening its information security program again. It was also required to report to
the FTC on its security efforts every 2 months until 2011. 5
The ChoicePoint data breach is unique because it spurred the creation of data
breach notification laws in many states. If it were not for the California breach
notification law, ChoicePoint might not have notified any consumers at all about the
data breach. Other states realized that their residents might not be able to protect
themselves from identity theft in similar situations without these laws. Thirty-five
states considered breach notification laws in 2005. The ChoicePoint case is widely
seen as the reason why other states have these laws.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.Breach Notification Regulations
California was the first state to have a breach notification law. It required businesses
to notify their customers if they suffered a data breach that disclosed personal data.
Many states have modeled their own breach notification laws on the California law.
This section discusses the California breach notification law, as well as the laws in
other states.
California Breach Notification Act
California’s Database Security Breach Notification Act law went into effect on July 1,
2003, and has been updated several times. The California legislature created the
law after a security breach at a state-operated data facility. The legislature
recognized that identity theft was one of the fastest growing crimes in California. It
stated that people must act quickly to limit the harm caused by identity theft. The
purpose of the law was to give California residents timely information so that they
can protect themselves.
The law applies to anyone who owns or uses computerized data that contains the
unencrypted personal information of a California resident. 6 It applies to:
State agencies
Nonprofit organizations
Private organizations
Businesses
It also can apply to businesses that are not actually located in California. It actually
covers any entity that stores the personal information of a California resident. Under
the law, an entity must notify California residents of a breach of its computer systems
and give notice if unauthorized individuals access and take the resident’s
unencrypted data.
FYI
Under California law, a security breach means unauthorized acquisition of computerized data. It must
“compromise the security, confidentiality, or integrity of personal information” held by an entity. 7 This
definition is confusing from an information security perspective because it refers to security and separately
to confidentiality and integrity. Confidentiality and integrity are part of the standard definition of security.
This type of imprecise definition is why information security professionals and lawmakers must work
together to create laws that impact information security.
The law defines personal information very broadly as information that allows a
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.person to be identified. Personal information is a person’s first name (or first initial)
and last name. The person’s name is combined with any of the following:
SSN
Driver’s license number or California Identification Card number
Account number, or credit or debit card number, along with any security code,
access code, or password that would allow access to a person’s account
Medical information
Health insurance information
Unique biometric information
Information collected through the state’s automated license plate recognition
system
Under the law, personal information is unencrypted data. If any of the data is
unencrypted, then all of the information is considered personal information.
Information that is available to the public through government records is not personal
information. The law also states that a username or email address, when combined
with a password or answer to a security question, is personal information if those
elements could be used to access an online account.
The law requires entities to notify California residents whenever a security breach
occurs. They must also notify residents as quickly as possible if they reasonably
believe that a breach has occurred. Under the law, there are two reasons to delay
notification. The first is to figure out the scope of the security breach. An entity must
do this so that it can notify the right people.
The second reason to delay notification is if law enforcement requires it. Law
enforcement can allow entities to delay notification if they are conducting a criminal
investigation. The entity must make the required notification as soon as possible
after it is determined that it will not hurt the investigation.
The law requires entities to give written notice to California residents, and that the
notice be written in plain language and clearly identify the entity making the notice. It
must also contain the following headings:
What Happened
What Information Was Involved
What We Are Doing
What You Can Do
For More Information
The law also contains a model security breach notification template that entities can
use.
Sometimes providing notice to a large number of people can be very expensive.
The California law allows entities to use a different type of notice if the entity can
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.prove that:
The cost of giving written notice is greater than $250,000.
The number of people to be notified is greater than 500,000.
It does not have sufficient contact information.
If an entity can prove one of these situations, it does not have to give individual
written notices. Instead, it must do all of the following to provide “substitute notice” of
the breach:
NOTE
Under the California law, encrypted means rendering data “unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable to an
unauthorized person through a security technology or methodology generally accepted in the field of
information security.” Think about whether this definition is sufficient to evaluate the effectiveness of the
encryption method used.
Notify affected people by email if the entity has an email address for the person.
Post notice of the security breach on its website (if it has one) for at least 30 days.
Notify major statewide media outlets about the breach.
The California law provides a safe harbor for entities that encrypt personal
information. A safe harbor is a legal concept that refers to specific actions someone
can take to show a good-faith effort to stay within the law and avoid prosecution.
Entities that properly encrypt the personal information that they own or maintain do
not have to follow the notification requirements if they have a data breach.
NOTE
In the law, a plaintiff can generally recover only damages in the amount that he or she has actually lost
because of harm or injury.
Finally, the law gives California residents a limited private cause of action against
entities that do not follow the law. Residents who are harmed when an entity does
not follow the law can sue for damages. 8
Other Breach Notification Laws
After the ChoicePoint breach, many other states created breach notification laws.
Today, all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin
Islands have breach notification laws. 9 Many states based their laws on the
California law, but there are some differences. They include:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.Activities that constitute a breach
The time for notifying residents
Requirements that a notification contain certain types of information
Minimum requirements for encryption
Civil or criminal penalties for failing to notify affected people
Additionally, unlike the California law, most other state laws typically do not allow a
private cause of action for failure to give notification.
Activities That Constitute a Breach
The California law applies to unauthorized acquisition of unencrypted personal
information. If attackers access the data, that is enough to trigger the law’s
notification requirements. Some other states require a showing of harm before
notification is required. This means that attackers must not only access the data, but
do something with it. For instance, the attackers must steal, copy, or change the data
before notification is required. In addition, some sort of harm therefore must be
anticipated. Stealing data is an anticipated harm under these laws. You must review
the definition of breach carefully in each law to see what triggers the notification
requirements.
For example, Ohio law requires more than unauthorized acquisition to trigger
notification. Under Ohio law, residents must be notified if the security breach
reasonably causes a material risk of identity theft or other fraud to the resident. 10 The
risk of harm can also be a future risk of harm. In this law, the material risk of identity
theft is enough to require notification.
NOTE
Alabama was the last state to enact a breach notification law.
Time for Notification
Under the general California breach notification law, entities must give notice in the
most expedient time possible without unreasonable delay. A majority of states follow
the California approach. However, some states require that entities give notice within
a certain period.
NOTE
Some other states that employ some sort of harm standard include Hawaii, Massachusetts, and Virginia.
Guam also has such a provision. Look up the breach notification law for your state to study its breach
definition.
Ohio law, for example, requires that notification be given to state residents in the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.most expedient time possible. However, that law also states that entities must give
this notice no later than 45 days after the discovery of the breach. 11 Florida has a
similar requirement and requires notification within 30 days. 12
Entities Excluded From Breach Notification Laws
Some states exclude some kinds of entities from their breach notification laws because these entities are
already subject to other laws with specific data security requirements. Many of these other laws have security
and privacy obligations that are stricter than the states’ own laws. If the entities are following these other
laws, then a security breach may be less likely. In some cases, state lawmakers determined that making
entities follow both the state breach notification law and the other laws would be too hard. It might hurt
businesses operating in the state.
Some states exempt financial institutions covered by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA). GLBA requires
these institutions to protect a customer’s nonpublic financial information through security safeguards. They
also must follow privacy rules. Breaches may be less likely if an institution follows GLBA. Many states exempt
these entities from notification laws. They include Alaska, Connecticut, Indiana, and Minnesota.
Some states also exempt entities that are covered by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
(HIPAA). HIPAA-covered entities must follow rules designed to protect personally identifiable health
information, as well as the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules. Recent amendments also impose breach
notification rules on HIPAA-covered entities. These rules may be even stricter than some state notification
laws. States that exempt HIPAA-covered entities from their laws include Arizona, Rhode Island, and
Wisconsin.
In Maine, an entity can only delay notification to help a criminal investigation. In
that case, an entity must give notice once law enforcement determines that the
notification will not hurt the investigation. At that point, the entity must provide notice
within 7 days. 13
NOTE
A business day is an official workday. Business days are the days of the week that include Monday
through Friday. Saturday and Sunday are not business days. Public holidays also are not business days.
Contents of Notification
Some states do not specify the types of information that should be included in a
notice of a data breach. Alaska is one of these states. There is a growing trend,
however, to specify the types of information that should be included in a notice.
States do this to make sure that residents get enough information to protect
themselves.
TIP
Remember, the reason for notification is to let people protect themselves from identity theft. Any delay in
notifying people should be as short as possible.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.North Carolina law requires that notice be given in a “clear and conspicuous”
form. 14 This means that it needs to be easily understandable. The notice also must:
Describe the incident in general terms.
Describe the type of personal information that was involved in the breach.
Describe how the entity is going to protect the personal information from additional
unauthorized access.
Provide a telephone number for the entity, if one exists, that a person may call for
more information.
Advise the person being notified to review his or her account statements and get a
free credit report.
Provide the toll-free telephone numbers and addresses for the major consumer
reporting agencies.
Provide the contact information for the FTC and the North Carolina attorney
general’s office, along with a statement that these sources have additional
information about preventing identity theft.
North Carolina also allows entities to notify residents by telephone, but only if the
entity makes direct contact with the people whose data was accessed in the breach.
Colorado law allows notice to be given in written and electronic form. 15 It also allows
notice by telephone.
Encryption Requirements
The California law provides an encryption safe harbor. Entities do not need to give
notice of a breach if the personal information in their computer system was
encrypted. California law does not specify the lowest level of encryption needed to
use the safe harbor. It also does not reference any industry standards.
Many other states also provide an encryption safe harbor. However, most states
do not specify a minimum level of encryption needed to take advantage of the safe
harbor.
TIP
Remember, a safe harbor is an action someone can take to show a good-faith effort to stay within the law.
Some states, however, do specify the encryption standards required to take
advantage of the safe harbor. For instance, Massachusetts defines encryption as the
use of a 128-bit or higher algorithmic process to transform data. 16
Indiana also provides an encryption safe harbor. Its law says that data is
encrypted if it is changed by an algorithmic process. It must be changed into a form
that is unreadable without the use of a confidential process or key. 17
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.NOTE
Algorithms are mathematical computations used to solve a problem and to encrypt data.
The Indiana law also addresses key management. For portable electronic
devices, such as laptop computers, the data must be protected by encryption and
the encryption key cannot be stored on the device. Indiana law also says that data is
considered encrypted if it is secured by any other method that makes the data
unreadable or unusable.
Penalties for Failure to Notify
Some states can impose penalties for violations of their breach notification laws. In
Texas, for example, the state can assess a fine against an entity that does not notify
affected people. 18 The law states that an entity can be fined at least $2,000 for a
violation. However, the fine cannot be larger than $50,000 for a single violation.
Other states have more complicated penalty structures. Under Florida law, an
entity that does not provide notification within 30 days of a breach faces potentially
large fines, 19 such as a $1,000-per-day fine for every day that the entity fails to give
notice after the 30-day limit. This penalty is in effect for the first 30 days after the 30-
day limit. After that, the fine increases to $50,000 for each additional 30-day period
that the entity fails to give notice. This extends up to 180 days (about 6 months) after
the 30-day mark for giving notice. If entities do not give notification within 180 days
after a breach, the state may fine them up to $500,000. FIGURE 9-1 illustrates the
Florida fine structure.
FIGURE 9-1
Florida fine structure for failure to give notification.
Description
Private Cause of Action
California law does not assess any penalties against an entity that does not follow
the notification law. However, it does allow a person a private cause of action against
those entities. For example, people can sue the private entity for any damages they
have because they did not receive notification in a timely manner. Some states, such
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.as Alaska, Maryland, and South Carolina, allow a private cause of action; however,
most states do not. The states that do not are generally seeking to protect the
entity’s business. They also do this to protect the court system, as it could be
burdensome to the court system to process many individual cases. Instead, most of
these states allow the state attorney general to pursue an action against the entity
for failure to give notification. These states include Iowa, Michigan, and Oklahoma.
NOTE
In Indiana, the failure to give notice is a deceptive act. The state attorney general’s office has the power to
prosecute deceptive acts. The fine for each act can be up to $150,000. 20
Every state now has a breach notification law to protect its residents. The laws
have some similarities, and some laws also have unique requirements. These laws
can be very confusing to businesses that operate in several states, because
breaches at these entities are almost certainly going to affect people in many states.
If this happens, an entity will have to review the laws of several states to properly
notify people about the breach.
Breach notification is hard for entities because states have different laws about
what constitutes a breach. An incident can be a breach in one state, but not another.
It also can be hard if entities must give notice in a certain way or within a certain
time. Differing penalties for noncompliance may also be a problem. Because the
laws all have different nuances, it may not be enough for an entity to comply with the
laws of its own state. FIGURE 9-2 provides a general decision tree that entities can
follow in reviewing a security breach to see if notice is required.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.FIGURE 9-2
Breach notification decision tree.
Description
The lack of uniformity among states may place additional burdens on businesses
that experience a security breach. People also may be confused if they get notices
that do not look similar. Notices might look different depending upon the law that the
entity followed in creating the notice. A federal breach notification law would help
eliminate this confusion. Federal laws have been proposed from time to time. As of
this writing, no such act has yet passed Congress.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.Data-Specific Security and Privacy Regulations
Many states have created laws to protect the use of certain types of information.
Similar to the federal government, they create laws by data type. This section
discusses some of the data-specific laws that states have created to protect
personal information.
Minnesota and Nevada: Requiring Businesses to
Comply With Payment Card Industry Standards
Some states have started to create laws that require entities in the state to comply
with industry security standards. For example, Minnesota and Nevada have created
laws that require businesses operating in those states to comply with parts of the
Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard (DSS).
When Is Federal Legislation Appropriate?
The federal government has limited lawmaking power. The U.S. Congress cannot make any laws outside of
the scope granted to it in the U.S. Constitution. This means that Congress cannot usually interfere in state
matters. It also cannot create a uniform federal law in areas legislated by the states unless there is a
compelling reason to do so.
Congress can create laws in areas where the U.S. Constitution allows it. For instance, the Constitution grants
the federal government the power to regulate commerce between the states. If an activity has the potential to
affect the trade relations between the states, then Congress may address it under its Commerce Clause
power.
Sometimes states enact laws that extend beyond their borders. If these laws affect trade between the states,
then it is possible that they start to infringe upon an area where the federal government alone has the power
to create laws. When this happens, the question arises whether that area has become “ripe” for federal
legislation.
When deciding if an area is ripe for federal legislation, Congress looks at whether differing state laws affect
activities that it traditionally regulates. It considers how many states have created laws addressing the
specific topic and reviews whether there is state confusion or complexity on activities that might affect
relationships between the states. Congress also looks at whether the differing state laws create an undue
burden or economic cost on businesses operating in several states.
Congress may use its legislative power to enact federal laws if there is confusion among the states. It does
this to eliminate confusion for businesses that operate in several states. If it creates a national law in an area
where there are many different state laws, the federal law will preempt the state laws. The state laws will no
longer be valid.
The Congressional Research Service has compiled reports on various federal laws that may create breach
notification requirements. The report notes that breach notification laws are complicated and often confusing.
You can read their 2019 report at https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R45631.
Minnesota’s 2007 Plastic Card Security Act was the first state law that attempted
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.to codify certain parts of the PCI DSS. It forbids businesses from storing cardholder
information for more than 48 hours after the credit card transaction is approved. 21
Information that cannot be stored includes:
Card verification number
PIN number
Contents of the card magnetic stripe
The PCI DSS also states that businesses may not retain this information. The
Minnesota law has turned this part of the PCI DSS industry standard into a law.
The Minnesota law shifts the cost of a breach to a business that violates the law.
If a business suffers a breach, and is found to have violated the storage
requirements, then it can be held responsible for costs related to the breach. For
instance, a bank or other financial institutions can sue the business to recover their
costs in responding to the breach. These costs include issuing new cards or
refunding unauthorized charges. 22
The Minnesota Plastic Card Security Act Supported by Financial Institutions
One of the reasons the Minnesota Plastic Card Security Act was introduced was the 2007 TJX data breach.
Financial institutions often paid the cost for notifying people that their credit and debit card information was
disclosed in a breach. There were other costs as well. If another organization suffered a breach that included
card data, financial institutions had to reissue the cards to their customers, which costs money. They had to
refund unauthorized charges. They also suffered reputation damage when customers asked whether the
financial institution was also involved in the breach.
The Minnesota Credit Union Network, an association of more than 160 credit
unions in Minnesota, was tired of paying for another organization’s weak security
practices. The Network engages in political advocacy, education, and awareness
activities. It pushed for the creation of the Plastic Card Security Act to help reduce its
costs for another organization’s security breach.
NOTE
Businesses that wish to accept credit cards for payment must follow the PCI DSS. The major credit card
companies require it, although it is not a law. Credit card companies such as Visa and MasterCard enforce
PCI DSS.
In 2010, Nevada was the first state to make following the entire PCI DSS a state
law requirement. 23 The Nevada law says that businesses will not be liable for
damages for a data breach, such as paying for credit cards to be reissued, if they
are following the law and did not engage in other intentional misconduct. Washington
state also provided businesses with a safe harbor from data breach liability if the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.business can certify that it was PCI DSS compliant at the time of the data breach. 24
The Washington law, however, does not require businesses to follow PCI DSS.
NOTE
The Nevada law states that “personal information” is a person’s name combined with SSN, financial
account number, credit card number, health insurance number, and driver’s license or other identification
number. 25
The Nevada law is novel because it makes following the entire PCI DSS required
by law. Some commentators thought that the Nevada law would encourage other
states to adopt similar laws. However, widespread adoption has not really happened.
This is because businesses that accept credit cards already have to comply with the
PCI DSS under their contracts with credit card companies. If they violate the PCI
DSS, they can be subject to large fines from those companies. Laws such as
Nevada’s do not protect businesses from fines from the credit card companies.
Indiana: Limiting SSN Use and Disclosure
Some states have created laws protecting SSNs. These laws recognize that SSNs
are highly sensitive pieces of information that can be very valuable to an identity
thief. Thieves can use the number to easily establish new identities to commit
identity theft crimes.
Indiana has laws designed to protect SSNs. For example, its laws forbid SSNs
from appearing in public documents. It also has laws that forbid state agencies from
disclosing a person’s SSN to any other person or entity.
Since 2006, Indiana law has stated that county recorders’ offices may not accept
any document for recording that contains an SSN. 26 The only time that they can
accept a document containing an SSN is when another law requires that the
document contain an SSN. Some types of federal laws, such as releases of federal
tax liens, require the use of an SSN.
NOTE
The Social Security Administration created the SSN in 1936 to track worker earnings. This was necessary
to administer the Social Security program. The first person to receive Social Security benefits was Ernest
Ackerman in January 1937. He received a one-time payout of 17 cents.
The state also was concerned that public records recorded before 2006 could
contain SSNs and that identity thieves could use these documents to get SSNs.
Since 2008, Indiana law states that county recorders cannot provide a recorded
document to a member of the public unless they first search the document for SSNs.
If they find a document with an SSN, they must redact it before allowing public
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.inspection. It is a civil violation for a county recorder or any employee to disclose a
recorded document containing an SSN without first searching the document for an
SSN. The law does not cover disclosure of the last four digits of an SSN.
The Importance of Legislative History
All laws have a legislative history that documents the number of times that a law is modified during the
period from introduction to signing. It includes any materials generated in the course of creating legislation,
committee reports and hearings, and transcripts of debate and reports issued by legislatures. The legislative
history can be reviewed to help determine what a legislature intended when it created a law. The Nevada law
requiring data collectors to follow PCI DSS went through many changes. You can read the law’s legislative
history at http://www.leg.state.nv.us/Session/75th2009/Reports/history.cfm?DocumentType=2&BillNo=227.
When Senate Bill 227 was first introduced, it contained no language requiring data collectors to follow PCI
DSS. Instead, it required data collectors to use certain types of approved encryption technologies. After the
bill was introduced, industry groups contacted the bill’s author to express concerns about the bill. They
opposed it because it was not technology neutral. You can read the letter submitted by industry groups at
http://www.leg.state.nv.us/75th2009/Exhibits/Assembly/CMC/ACMC1140C.pdf.
After negotiation, the bill was amended to include the PCI language. Little information was included in the
legislative history to indicate why the PCI language was added. A question that remains is whether the
businesses that objected to the bill’s original language are happy with the final law that requires PCI
compliance.
FYI
A county recorder’s office keeps public records about certain types of transactions. These offices usually
handle legal documents regarding real estate ownership. These documents are filed, or recorded, with a
county recorder’s office to give public notice of the transaction. Certain types of records also can be filed
with a county recorder for future reference or safekeeping.
Indiana law also provides that a state agency may not disclose a person’s SSN to
anyone. 27 State agencies include an elected official’s office and state educational
institutions. However, there are limited exceptions to this law. A state agency is
allowed to disclose an SSN if:
A person gives explicit written consent for the disclosure of his or her SSN.
The disclosure is required by state or federal law.
The disclosure is required by a court order.
The law lists very specific penalties for an inappropriate disclosure of a person’s
SSN. The state agency is not responsible for these penalties. Instead, they are
directed at the state agency employee who disclosed the SSN. For instance, a state
agency employee who “knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly” discloses an SSN in
violation of the law commits a Level 6 felony. This is a criminal sanction. In Indiana, a
Level 6 felony can result in a prison term between 6 months and 2.5 years. In
addition, a person can be fined up to $10,000. 28
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.NOTE
One of the biggest differences between civil law and criminal law is punishment. In civil law, a defendant is
not sent to jail as a punishment. Instead, civil law imposes fines. Civil law also requires a defendant to
reimburse a plaintiff for damages. In criminal law, punishment usually involves fines or prison sentences,
or both.
If a state agency employee negligently discloses an SSN, the person commits a
Class A infraction. In Indiana, an infraction is a civil sanction that a person cannot be
imprisoned for. However, he or she can receive a fine of up to $10,000.
Under the law, if a state agency impermissibly discloses an SSN, it must notify
the affected person. It also must notify the state attorney general’s office. Under the
law, the state attorney general has the authority to investigate an improper
disclosure of an SSN. The state attorney general also can make additional rules to
carry out the nondisclosure law. Individuals do not have a private cause of action
under the law. For example, they cannot sue a state agency for wrongfully disclosing
an SSN.
Other states have laws designed to protect SSNs. Arizona law, for example,
prohibits printing an SSN on government or private identification cards. This law also
prohibits the transmission of a person’s SSN over an unsecured internet
connection. 29 California law forbids companies from requiring people to transmit an
SSN over the internet unless the connection is secure or the SSN is encrypted.
California: Protecting Consumer Privacy
California continues to be at the forefront of states that seek to protect the data of
their citizens. In 2018, California enacted the California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA). 30 The CCPA governs the protection of personal information that is collected
by businesses, which must comply with the CCPA if they meet any of the following:
Have gross annual revenues in excess of $25 million
Buy, receive, or sell the personal information of 50,000 or more consumers,
households, or devices
Derive 50 percent or more of their annual revenues from selling consumers’
personal information
If a business is covered by the CCPA, it must provide notice to consumers of their
rights and how to exercise those rights before it collects data from the consumer.
Consumers have the following rights under the CCPA:
The right to know—A consumer has a right to know what personal information is
collected, used, shared, and sold by the business.
The right to delete—A consumer has the right to demand that a business delete
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.the consumer’s personal information.
The right to opt-out—A consumer has the right to opt-out of the sale of his or her
personal information or to tell the business to stop selling that information.
The right to nondiscrimination—A consumer should not be subject to price or
service discrimination when a consumer exercises a privacy right under CCPA.
The California attorney general enforces the CCPA. The law allows for civil penalties
of $2,500 for each violation or $7,500 for each intentional violation. Penalties can
only be imposed after a business receives notice of the violation and has 30 days to
correct the violation.
NOTE
The individual rights included in the CCPA are similar to the individual rights guaranteed by the European
Union General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.Encryption Regulations
Some states require entities doing business within the state to follow basic
information security practices to protect the security and privacy of data. Other states
are more aggressive. They require entities to use specific security practices, such as
encryption.
FYI
The Massachusetts Office of Consumer Affairs and Business Regulation held a public hearing on the data
protection standards in January 2009. The hearing showed that businesses were worried about meeting
the standards. You can read a transcript from the hearing and written comments at
http://www.mass.gov/ocabr/docs/idtheft/201cmr17comments.pdf.
Massachusetts: Protecting Personal Information
Massachusetts has created some of the nation’s most rigorous data protection laws.
For example, it created its breach notification law in 2007. 31 That law also required
the state’s consumer affairs department to issue standards for the protection of
personal information. The law stated that the standards should:
Protect the security and confidentiality of personal information consistent with
industry standards.
Protect against anticipated threats to the security or integrity of personal
information.
Protect against unauthorized access to or use of personal information that could
harm a person.
The Massachusetts “Standards for the Protection of Personal Information of
Residents of the Commonwealth” was released in September 2008 and went into
effect in 2010. The law has very broad application. 32 Any person that uses and
stores personal information about Massachusetts residents as part of the sale of
goods and services must comply with it. However, the law does not apply to state
agencies.
Entities subject to the law must follow data protection standards to safeguard the
personal information of Massachusetts residents. These entities must protect
personal information in both electronic and paper form. The definition of personal
information is similar to the definitions used in the breach notification laws discussed
at the beginning of this chapter. Under the data protection standard, personal
information is a person’s first and last name, or first initial and last name, and any of
the following:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.SSN
Driver’s license number or state identification card number
Financial account number, or credit or debit card number, with or without password
or PIN
The standard requires entities to create an information security program. It states
that an entity’s information security program must be a good fit for its size and
scope. It also must fit the entity’s type of business. It must describe the
administrative, technical, and physical controls that protect the personal information
used by the entity. The program requirements are similar to those stated in the GLBA
Safeguards Rule.
NOTE
The GLBA is a law that requires entities engaged in certain kinds of financial transactions to follow privacy
and information security rules. These rules are designed to protect customers’ personal information.
The standard uses a risk-based approach to information security. It allows the
entity to review its resources and data use. It also can review its needs for security
and confidentiality. The entity can use the results of this review to determine the
safeguards it should use. As part of its program, an entity must:
Assign an employee to manage the program.
Conduct a risk assessment to identify risks to the security, confidentiality, and
integrity of information. Review current safeguards to make sure that they are
effective.
Develop policies for use of personal information off business premises.
Develop disciplinary policies for failure to follow the information security program.
Develop policies to keep terminated employees from accessing personal
information.
Select service providers and make sure that any contract includes terms to protect
personal information.
Develop policies to physically safeguard personal information.
Monitor and review the program to make sure it is effective.
Document actions taken in response to any security breach. 33
The standard also includes computer system security requirements. This part of the
standard directs entities to implement the security requirements. They must do this
as long as the requirements are technically feasible. An entity does not have to apply
requirements that are not technically feasible. 34
The standard states that an information security program must include specific
security requirements. They are:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.Secure user authentication
Secure access control measures
Encryption of all transmitted personal information that travels across public
networks, and encryption of information to be transmitted wirelessly
Reasonable monitoring of systems
Encryption of all personal information stored on laptops or portable devices
Up-to-date firewall protection and operating system security patches on computers
containing personal information
Virus and malware protection
Security awareness and training activities
NOTE
Under the standard, “technically feasible” means that if there is a reasonable way to accomplish a required
technology result, then an entity must do so.
FYI
Massachusetts has released a video about its data protection laws. You can view the video at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ETYwkTpeXHI.
The encryption requirements have received a lot of attention. They require
businesses to encrypt the personal information of Massachusetts residents while it is
stored on their systems. They also must encrypt it when it is transmitted. The
standard does not define a preferred method of encryption. Instead, encryption is
defined in a technology-neutral way. Under the standard, encryption is changing data
into an unreadable form. The encrypted data cannot be read or understood without
an encryption key, which is used to encrypt and decrypt data.
The Massachusetts attorney general has the authority to enforce the data
protection standard. The law allows civil penalties of up to $5,000 for each violation.
The attorney general can also make an entity pay for the costs of an investigation
into any violations. Entities can also be charged attorneys’ fees. 35
The Massachusetts data protection standard is unique. It attempts to regulate
businesses outside of Massachusetts by requiring businesses to encrypt the
personal data of Massachusetts residents. This may be hard because businesses
typically must follow only the laws of the state where they are located. Under the law,
this is a jurisdiction issue. Only revisions to the standard, or a court case, will help
clarify how widely the state may enforce this standard.
NOTE
Although the Massachusetts data protection standards do not define a preferred method of encryption, the
Massachusetts breach notification law does. Under the state’s breach notification law, encryption is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.defined as a transformation of data through the use of a 128-bit or higher algorithmic process. The process
must change into a form that is unreadable without the use of a key. 37
Nevada Law: Standards-Based Encryption
Nevada law also has data encryption requirements. The Nevada law requires data
collectors to use encryption if they are transmitting personal information outside of
their business network. They must encrypt the data if it is sent externally via email or
any other electronic transmission. This requirement helps protect data while it is
being transferred from one entity to another. The Nevada law excludes facsimiles
from the transmission encryption requirements. 36
The law also requires data collectors to encrypt personal information on any data
storage device that is moved beyond the technical or physical controls of their
business. This means that they must encrypt any storage device that leaves the
business location. They also must encrypt backup tapes containing personal
information that they send to an off-site storage facility. This portion of the law helps
protect data if the storage media is lost or stolen.
The encryption rule is novel because of its breadth. It covers data when it is
stored and when it is transmitted. The law is also interesting because of how it
defines encryption. This is one area where the Nevada law varies greatly from the
Massachusetts encryption law. The Massachusetts law defines encryption in a
technology-neutral way. It does not reference any industry standards. The Nevada
law, however, references industry standards.
Under the Nevada law, data collectors must use encryption technologies adopted
by a standards-setting body. The law references the Federal Information Processing
Standards, which are issued by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST). Under the law, the technology used must make the personal information
unreadable. 38
NOTE
Nevada law defines data storage devices as computers, cell phones, and external computer hard drives. It
also includes backup storage media.
The law also requires that data collectors use good cryptographic key
management practices to protect encryption keys. Encryption keys encrypt and
decrypt data. They must be carefully guarded. These keys protect the confidentiality
of data. They also protect the integrity of the whole encryption process. The law
requires data collectors to use key management practices created by a standards
setting body. Again, the law specifically refers to NIST standards. 39
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.NOTE
You can read the Federal Information Processing Standards at
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsFIPS.html.
A data collector that complies with the law is not liable for damages resulting from
a security breach. This protection extends to a breach so long as the data collector’s
own gross negligence did not cause the breach.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.Data Disposal Regulations
As of January 2019, at least 35 states and Puerto Rico have created data disposal
laws. 40 They have created these laws to make sure that personal information is
properly disposed of. Personal data must be protected throughout its life cycle. This
includes disposing of the information in an appropriate way.
Washington: Everyone Has an Obligation
Washington State created its personal data disposal law in 2002. 41 In creating the
law, the state legislature made comments about how important the law was. It said
that:
Careless disposal of personal information causes a significant risk of identity theft.
Improper disposal threatens a person’s privacy and financial security.
Everyone in the state has a duty to dispose properly of personal information. 42
The Washington disposal law applies to any person or entity in the state. It requires
an entity to take reasonable steps to destroy records that contain health and
financial data when it determines that it no longer needs those records.
NOTE
The only entity specifically excluded by the Washington law is the federal government. The law also states
that entities that comply with the GLBA Safeguards Rule or HIPAA Security and Privacy Rules are
considered compliant with the state law.
The law requires entities to properly destroy information held in their records.
Records are defined as any material—paper or electronic—that holds information.
Entities must make sure that they destroy any personal financial or health
information in their records. Personal financial and health information is data that
identifies a person and is commonly used for financial or healthcare reasons.
The law states that an entity must destroy information in records so that it is no
longer readable or decipherable. The law also states that proper destruction includes
shredding, erasing, or modifying records so that they are no longer readable. 43
The Washington law allows a person harmed by a violation of the law to sue the
entity that violated it. The law provides the plaintiff with several remedies that vary
depending on the type of violation. If the entity’s failure to comply with the law was
because of negligence, a court may award a penalty of $200 or actual damages. The
court must award a plaintiff whichever amount is greater.
If an entity’s failure to comply with the law was intentional, then the court can
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.award a penalty of $600 or actual damages. Again, the court must award whichever
amount is greater. The law also allows the court to award “treble” (triple) damages,
which are three times the amount of the actual damages incurred. The law states
that treble damages may not be more than $10,000. 44
NOTE
Treble damages are damages that punish a defendant for intentional conduct.
The law also allows the state attorney general to prosecute an entity that violates
the law. In that instance, a court must award damages the same way that it awards
damages to an individual plaintiff. The court may also grant injunctive relief. This
means that it can order the entity to stop violating the law.
New York: Any Physical Record
On the other side of the country, New York State also has a data disposal law. 45 Its
law states that no person or business may dispose of a record containing “personal
identifying information” without shredding, destroying, or modifying it so that the
information is no longer readable. The law requires that any person or business
destroying the records must take action that is consistent with commonly accepted
industry practices. They must use these practices to make sure that no unauthorized
person has access to information in the record.
Under the New York law, records are any information held in any physical form,
either paper or electronic. They include reports, letters, and computer tapes. Any
type of data storage medium is a record. Personal identifying information is
information in a record that identifies a person by name and includes any of the
following:
SSN
Driver’s license number or identification card number
Mother’s maiden name, financial account numbers or code, or any other
identification number
The law allows for penalties of up to $5,000 for improper disposal. The attorney
general alone has the authority to pursue violations of the law. There is no private
cause of action.
Confidential Documents Used as Confetti
If you are a Yankees fan, 2009 was a very good year. It was their first World Series win since 2000. They
celebrated their 27th World Series win with a ticker tape parade in New York City on November 4, 2009.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.The term ticker tape parade originated in New York City. These parades are rare now, because real ticker
tape has not been used since the 1960s. They are traditionally reserved for large celebrations, such as sports
victories.
The 2009 parade for the Yankees was the first ticker tape parade in New York City since the Giants won the
Super Bowl in 2008. Sports fans were very excited. When they ran out of confetti, they dumped any type of
paper that they could find from skyscraper windows. This included documents containing personal
information. News media reported that after the parade, law firm memos, banking records, and court files
were recovered from the debris in the street.
One financial firm had to discipline an employee who threw documents marked for destruction instead of
confetti. These documents contained financial information and SSNs.
NOTE
The New York law specifically excludes state agencies.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.Case Studies and Examples
The following case highlights unclear federal policies about data breach notification.
At the time of this incident, federal law did not require agencies to have breach
notification policies. In fact, there is still no federal law that requires this. However,
because of this incident, most federal agencies have implemented internal breach
notification policies.
NOTE
The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs is also called the Veterans Administration (VA).
In 2006, an employee of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) took home
a laptop computer and external hard drive. The hard drive held the personal
information of every veteran discharged since 1975. It was not encrypted. On May 3,
2006, the employee’s home was burglarized. Thieves stole the laptop and hard
drive. The local police department investigated the burglary.
The employee immediately informed his supervisors about the theft, but they did
not take the matter seriously. The secretary of the VA did not learn about it until
almost 2 weeks later. The VA secretary then notified the Federal Bureau of
Investigations (FBI) about the theft. The FBI began to investigate the theft with the
local police department.
The VA issued a statement reporting the facts about the theft on May 22, 2006. It
also said that the data stolen included names, SSNs, and dates of birth for 26.5
million veterans, as well as data on some of their spouses. At the time, the VA
reported that the hard drive did not contain any health or financial information.
Congress was outraged that the VA waited so long to make a public statement.
On May 25, 2006, the secretary of the VA appeared at hearings before the U.S.
House and Senate to discuss the issue. In his Senate testimony, he stated that he
was furious that he was not notified in a timely manner. He also stated that the VA
was planning to notify all people affected by the theft. He said that it would take time
to prepare the mailing because the VA had to verify addresses. He also said that 26
million envelopes “were not immediately available.” The VA began mailing the
notification letters on June 9, 2006.
As it carried out its investigation, the VA learned that the hard drive held some
health information for 2.6 million people. It also learned that the hard drive contained
the personal information of active-duty military personnel. On June 6, 2006, the VA
reported that the hard drive held the data of 1.1 million active-duty troops. It also had
information on 430,000 members of the National Guard and 645,000 members of the
Reserves.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.The police recovered the stolen laptop and hard drive in late June 2006. The FBI
reported that a forensic review of the equipment showed that the database
containing the personal information had not been accessed. In August 2006, the VA
mailed a follow-up letter to people affected by the event.
The VA Inspector General investigated the incident and found that the VA
employee was not permitted to take the laptop or hard drive home. The report
faulted the employee for using poor judgment in taking the data home. It also faulted
the employee for not properly protecting it. The report also criticized VA supervisors
for not taking initial reports about the data loss seriously.
In January 2009, the VA agreed to pay $20 million to veterans whose information
was potentially exposed in the incident. It paid this amount to settle lawsuits brought
by five veterans groups. The money was used to create a compensation fund.
Veterans who wished to make a claim against the fund needed to file claims by
November 27, 2009.
Congress created the Veterans Affairs Information Security Act of 2006 in
response to the breach. The law requires the VA to create a comprehensive
information security program. It also requires it to create breach notification
regulations. The VA issued those regulations in April 2008. They require the VA to
notify people in the event of a security breach if there is a reasonable risk for the
potential misuse of their personal information. 46
NOTE
The U.S. Government Accountability Office released a report on lessons learned from the 2006 VA
incident. You can read the report at http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d07657.pdf.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.CHAPTER SUMMARY
This chapter reviewed state laws that protect data. States have been very
active in trying to protect the personal data of their residents. They have
created many different laws to protect the security and privacy of this
information because there is no one comprehensive federal data privacy or
security law. When reviewing state laws that protect certain types of data, it
is important for you to think about what other state or federal laws might also
protect the data.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Breach notification law
Legislative history
Safe harbor
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.CHAPTER 9 ASSESSMENT
1. The ChoicePoint data breach was the triggering event that caused many states
to create data protection laws.
A. True
B. False
2. California’s breach notification law went into effect in ________.
3. Most states define personal information as name plus which of the following
elements?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Date of birth
Address
Phone number
Social Security number
None of these is correct.
4. An encryption safe harbor is ________.
5. What is a state breach notification law?
A. A law that requires that residents be notified if a dam breaks
B. A law that requires that residents be notified if a business has a security
breach that compromises their personal data
C. A law that requires that residents be notified if a business has a security
breach that compromises the business’s confidential data
D. A law that requires that businesses be notified if a government has a security
breach that compromises the business’s confidential data
E. None of these is correct.
6. Which types of entities are sometimes excluded from breach notification laws?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
GLBA financial institutions
HIPAA-covered entities
Out-of-state businesses
GLBA financial institutions and HIPAA-covered entities
GLBA financial institutions, HIPAA-covered entities, and out-of-state
businesses
7. What is not a business day?
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
An official workday
A day of the week that includes Monday through Friday
Memorial Day
Tuesday
None of these is correct.
8. “Clear and conspicuous” notice means that ________.
9. Which states allow data breach notification to be given by telephone?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
California
Colorado
North Carolina
California and Colorado
Colorado and North Carolina
10. What technology standards are permitted under the Nevada encryption law?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
PCI DSS
SO 1799
NIST
FTC
HIPAA
11. Which states have required businesses to follow all, or part, of the PCI DSS?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Minnesota
Nevada
California
Minnesota and Nevada
Minnesota and California
12. A private cause of action is ________.
13. If the U.S. Congress creates a federal breach notification law, what happens to
state laws?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
They are no longer valid.
They are still valid as long as they are stricter than federal law.
They are still valid in their original form.
They are still valid as long as they are weaker than federal law.
None of these is correct.
14. What is the purpose of legislative history?
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
To help determine which laws to abolish
To help decide how to create new laws
To help determine how old a law is
To help determine what a legislature intended when it created a law
None of these is correct.
15. What is one of the biggest differences between civil and criminal law?
The amount of fines
Whether a person can be sentenced to prison
How long the offense stays on your criminal record
The type of judge that hears the case
The color of the prison jumpsuits
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.ENDNOTES
1. CNET, “ChoicePoint Data Theft Widens to 145,000 People,” February 18, 2005.
https://www.cnet.com/news/choicepoint-data-theft-widens-to-145000-people/
(accessed April 27, 2020).
2. PC World, “ChoicePoint Details Data Breach Lessons,” June 11, 2007.
https://www.pcworld.com/article/132795/article.html (accessed April 27, 2020).
3. Federal Trade Commission, “ChoicePoint Settles Data Security Breach
Charges; to Pay $10 Million in Civil Penalties, $5 Million for Consumer
Redress,” January 26, 2006. https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-
releases/2006/01/choicepoint-settles-data-security-breach-charges-pay-10-
million (accessed April 27, 2020).
4. InfoWorld, “States Settle With ChoicePoint Over 2004 Breach,” May 31, 2007.
https://www.infoworld.com/article/2662493/states-settle-with-choicepoint-over-
2004-breach.html (accessed April 27, 2020).
5. Federal Trade Commission, “Consumer Data Broker ChoicePoint Failed to
Protect Consumers’ Personal Data, Left Key Electronic Monitoring Tool Turned
Off for Four Months,” October 19, 2009. https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-
releases/2009/10/consumer-data-broker-choicepoint-failed-protect-consumers
(accessed April 27, 2020).
6. California Civil Code, sec. 1798.29, and sec. 1798.82.
7. California Civil Code, sec. 1798.29, and sec. 1798.82.
8. California Civil Code, sec. 1798.84.
9. National Conference of State Legislatures, “Security Breach Notification Laws,”
March 8, 2020. https://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-
information-technology/security-breach-notification-laws.aspx (accessed April
27, 2020).
10. Ohio Revised Code, sec. 1347.12.
11. Ohio Revised Code, sec. 1347.12, and sec. 1349.19.
12. Florida Statutes, sec. 817.5681.
13. Maine Revised Statutes, Title 10, sec. 1348.
14. North Carolina General Statutes, sec. 75-65.
15. Colorado Revised Statutes, sec. 6-1-716.
16. Massachusetts Gen. Laws ch. 93H, sec. 1- 6.
17. Indiana Code, sec. 24-4.9-2-4.
18. Texas Business and Commercial Code Annotated, sec. 521.151.
19. Florida Statutes, sec. 817.5681.
20. Indiana Code, sec. 24-4.9-4-2.
21. Minnesota Statutes, sec. 325E.64.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
Minnesota Statutes, sec. 325E.64.
Nevada Revised Statutes, sec. 603A.215.
Washington Revised Code, sec. 19.255.020.
Nevada Revised Statutes, sec. 603A.040.
Indiana Code, sec. 36-2-7.5-4.
Indiana Code, sec. 4-1-10-3(b).
Indiana Code, sec. 35-50-2-7.
Arizona Revised Statutes, sec. 44-1373.
California Civil Code Title 1.81.5, sec. 1798.100-1798.199.
Massachusetts General Law, chapter 93H, sec. 2.
Code of Massachusetts Regulations, Title 201, sec. 17.01-17.05.
Code of Massachusetts Regulations, Title 201, sec. 17.03.
Code of Massachusetts Regulations, Title 201, sec. 17.04.
Massachusetts General Law, chapter 93A, sec. 4.
Nevada Revised Statutes, sec. 603A.215.
Massachusetts General Law, chapter 93H, sec. 1.
Nevada Revised Statutes, sec. 603A.215.
Nevada Revised Statutes, sec. 603A.215.
National Conference of State Legislatures, “Data Disposal Laws,” January 4,
2020. https://www.ncsl.org/research/telecommunications-and-information-
technology/data-disposal-laws.aspx (accessed April 27, 2020).
Revised Code of Washington, Title 19, sec. 19.215.005 to 19.215.030.
Revised Code of Washington, Title 19, sec. 19.215.005.
Revised Code of Washington, Title 19, sec. 19.215.010.
Revised Code of Washington, Title 19, sec. 19.215.020.
New York’s General Business Law, sec. 399-H.
Department of Veterans Affairs, Data Breach Fine Rule, Code of Federal
Regulations, Title 38, sec. 75.117.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:44:52.
