© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
CHAPTER
3
The American Legal System
OR OVER TWO DECADES, the shows in the Law and Order franchise have
been popular with television viewers. Each episode transports viewers into the
world of American criminal law and process. A crime, investigation, and judicial
process are neatly wrapped in a 1-hour episode, from the dramatic opening theme
song with its scene-changing “clang” sound, to the final scene when justice is
served. Law and Order episodes focus on criminal law, which is one aspect of the
American legal system.
F
This chapter provides a high-level overview of the legal system in the United
States. It is important for Americans to have a general understanding of this system
because it affects us every day. We are bound by a system of laws that regulate our
behavior and contribute to an ordered society. Laws reflect our values, and they
evolve over time.
The American legal system, its history, and its processes are a fascinating area
of study. Many talented judges, attorneys, and law scholars have written excellent
books about it. This chapter provides only an overview, but will outline a framework
that can enable you to do further reading and research on this topic.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.Chapter 3 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
How the American legal system is organized
What the sources of American law are
What the types of law are
What the role of precedent is
What regulatory authorities are
What the difference is between compliance and audit
How security, privacy, and compliance fit together
Chapter 3 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the American legal system
Explain sources of law
Distinguish between different types of law
Explain the role of precedent
Describe the role of regulatory authorities
Explain the difference between compliance and audit
Describe how security, privacy, and compliance fit together
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.The American Legal System
The American legal system is composed of many distinct parts: federal and state
governments, laws, and courts. Federal law exclusively governs some areas of the
U.S. legal system; other areas depend on the subtle nuances of state law. Some
parts of the legal system are based on written laws, called statutes or codes, which
are developed by governments. Other areas of the law depend on principles
developed from years of legal tradition and court decisions. There are two main
types of laws. Civil law provides for the resolution of disputes between private
individuals, organizations, or governments. Criminal law governs the prosecution of
those charged with serious offenses against public order, such as murder.
The basis for the American system of government, and the American legal
system, is the U.S. Constitution.
Federal Government
The U.S. Constitution was ratified in 1789 and sets forth the structure of the U.S.
federal government. Representatives from almost all of the states in existence at the
time worked together to draft the Constitution. The state representatives realized that
there were some areas in which a strong federal government was needed in order to
keep the states united. However, the state representatives did not want a federal
government that was too strong, nor did they want any one portion of the federal
government to have too much power. These considerations help explain the current
structure of the federal government.
The U.S. Constitution calls itself “the supreme Law of the Land.” 1 It is the
fundamental authority for the American federal system of government. The
Constitution defines three co-equal roles in the federal government:
Legislative
Executive
Judicial
Eligibility Requirements for the President and Members of Congress
The Constitution provides eligibility requirements for the president and members of Congress. The president
must be a natural-born U.S. citizen and must be at least 35 years old. The president must have been a
resident of the United States for at least 14 years at the time of election. 2
Senators must be at least 30 years old. They must have been citizens of the United States for at least 9
years. They must also be residents of the state from which they are elected. 3
House members must be at least 25 years old. They must have been citizens of the United States for at least
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.7 years. They must also be residents of the congressional district from which they are elected. 4
The legislative branch makes the laws, the executive branch enforces the laws, and
the judicial branch reviews the laws to make sure they are constitutional. This is the
“checks and balances” system that describes the relationship among the three
branches of the federal government. Each branch of government has a separate
sphere of authority (balances). The actions of each branch of government are
subject to review by the other branches (checks).
The U.S. Constitution also defines the relationship between the federal
government and the states. At the time that the Constitution was drafted and ratified,
people debated the appropriate relationship between the federal and state
governments. The previous legal document that established the federal government,
the Articles of Confederation, was too weak to keep the states joined together.
However, an overly strong federal government was seen as an obstacle that would
prevent states and individuals from controlling their own affairs. The states wanted to
make sure that they retained the authority to control their own affairs. The
Constitution contains specific provisions to reflect this divided authority.
The Constitution also provides some of the fundamental rights of individuals.
Individual rights are located primarily in the Bill of Rights, which was ratified in 1791.
The term Bill of Rights refers collectively to the first 10 amendments to the
Constitution. These amendments are the basis for the personal rights that
Americans hold most dear:
NOTE
Rhode Island was the only original state that did not send representatives to the Constitutional
Convention.
Freedom of speech (First Amendment)
Freedom of religion (First Amendment)
Freedom from unreasonable search and seizure (Fourth Amendment)
The right against self-incrimination (Fifth Amendment)
NOTE
Federalism is a term that describes the relationship between the states and the U.S. federal government.
Legislative Branch
The lawmaking authority of the legislative branch of the federal government is
outlined in Article I, section 8 of the Constitution. Collectively, the legislative branch
is called Congress. The federal government actually has limited lawmaking power.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.Congress cannot make any laws outside the scope that the Constitution specifically
delegates to it.
The U.S. Congress consists of two chambers: the U.S. Senate and the U.S.
House of Representatives. The Senate has 100 members, two senators from each
state. In this way, the Senate represents all states equally. The House of
Representatives has 435 members. The House represents the population, as each
Representative represents a congressional district. Congressional districts all have
roughly the same number of people. The current number of people in each
congressional district is 711,000. The congressional districts are redrawn after each
decennial census and will next be redrawn after the 2020 census. Each state gets at
least one representative no matter its total population size.
Article I, section 8 of the Constitution lists the powers delegated to Congress,
which are very broad. Congress has the power to:
Declare war
Establish the post office
Maintain armed forces
Coin (or print) money
Regulate commerce
Make other laws necessary for carrying out its constitutional duties
The Commerce Clause grants Congress the power to regulate commerce between
the states. 5 Congress uses this provision as justification to regulate trade, or any
other commercial activity, between the states. Many Supreme Court cases have
reviewed the limits of this power. In general, if an activity has the potential to affect
the trade relations between the states, then Congress is able to legislate it.
Congress also has the power to enact laws that are “necessary and proper” for
carrying out its duties. 6 Congress can use the power implied in this section to
legislate in several different areas.
NOTE
Preemption refers to the legal concept that means that a higher-ranking law will exclude or preempt a
lower-ranking law on the same subject. This rule especially holds in the federal legislative context with
respect to the Commerce Clause. States are preempted from making laws that may affect the trade
relations between the states.
The Constitution specifies the basic lawmaking process. A bill is the initial draft of
a potential law. Both chambers of Congress must approve the same bill, and the
president must sign it before it becomes a law. 7
The procedural documents of both chambers describe the process for moving
bills through each chamber. Once a bill is introduced, it is generally assigned to a
specialty committee. The bill is revised during the committee process, which usually
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.includes hearings to determine why a law is needed in the first place. After the
hearings, the committee votes on whether the bill should be sent to the full chamber
for consideration. When a bill passes one chamber, it is forwarded to the other
chamber for consideration.
Once a bill passes both chambers, it goes to a conference committee made up of
both senators and representatives. This committee reviews both the Senate and
House of Representatives’ versions of the bill. This committee cannot substantially
change the bills being compared, but tries to reach a compromise on both versions
of the bill. When the committee reaches a resolution on the bill, they report back to
their respective chambers. Each chamber votes on the bill again. If the original
conference committee cannot reach an agreement, the bill may be assigned to a
new conference committee or go back into committees of each chamber for
additional revisions.
The speaker of the House of Representatives and the president of the Senate
sign all bills that pass in Congress before delivering them to the president. The
president has 10 days to sign the bill. If the president does not sign it within 10 days,
then it becomes law just as if the president had signed it.
Executive Branch
Article II establishes the power of the executive branch of government. The president
of the United States, a nationally elected official, leads the executive branch of
government. The president is also the commander-in-chief of the U.S. armed forces
and is often considered the “face” of the United States.
The president has the power to enforce the laws of the United States and the
responsibility for maintaining the day-to-day operations of the U.S. government. The
president also has the power to sign or veto any legislation that Congress passes.
(Congress can then override a presidential veto with a two-thirds vote of both the
House and the Senate.) Once the president signs the legislation, it becomes an Act
of Congress, a federal law passed by the Congress and signed by the president.
The president also appoints federal judicial, executive, and administrative
officials. The Senate must approve some of the president’s appointees, such as
Cabinet members or federal judicial appointees. The president also has the power to
negotiate and enter into treaties with other countries. However, the U.S. Senate must
ratify those treaties.
NOTE
Federal laws are published in the United States Code, which is published by the federal government every
6 years. The current version was published in 2018. You can find online versions of the code at
https://uscode.house.gov/.
The role of the U.S. Cabinet is to advise the president. The Cabinet includes the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.U.S. vice president and the heads of 15 executive departments. President George
Washington established the first Cabinet. Although the Constitution recognizes that
the president should have advisers in executive departments, it does not specify the
type or number of executive departments. Congress creates the executive
departments.
Judicial Branch
Article III of the Constitution establishes the judicial branch of the federal
government. This Article vests the judicial power of the United States in one
supreme court. The U.S. Supreme Court is the highest court in the country.
The U.S. Supreme Court is the only court specifically required by the U.S.
Constitution. Congress has the authority to determine the actual number of Supreme
Court justices; currently, there are nine. The president nominates the justices when
there is a vacancy on the Court. The Senate must confirm the nomination. Supreme
Court nominees are usually highly respected state or federal judges or highly
respected attorneys.
Supreme Court justices, similar to all federal judges, are appointed for life. They
serve until their retirement, death, or removal. Supreme Court justices can be
removed only if they are impeached and convicted by Congress. The Constitution
requires that all federal court judges be appointed for life for a simple reason: to help
promote an independent judiciary. The drafters of the Constitution did not want the
review of law to be dependent upon popular political ideas. Instead, they wanted
federal judges appointed for life, so that they could not be fired if their decisions were
unpopular or not favorable to a particular political party. TABLE 3-1 lists the
members of the U.S. Supreme Court as of January 2020.
TABLE 3-1 Members of the U.S. Supreme Court as of January 2020.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.
DescriptionStructure of the Federal Judiciary. It is important to understand how the different
courts in the federal system relate to one another. Once this structure is understood,
it can be applied generally to state judicial systems.
Courts have the ability to hear only cases, or disputes, that are within their
jurisdiction. Jurisdiction describes the types of cases that a court has the authority
to hear. There are three main types of jurisdiction used to describe the function of a
court:
Original jurisdiction—The power of a court to hear the initial dispute between
parties. These courts conduct trials. Usually trial courts have original jurisdiction.
Concurrent jurisdiction—Jurisdiction that is shared by several different courts.
Appellate jurisdiction—The power of a court to review a decision made by a
lower court.
In the federal court system, federal courts have limited jurisdiction. That means that
they can hear only certain types of cases that fall within a limited subject matter. The
jurisdiction of the federal courts is determined by the Constitution and laws made by
Congress. Federal courts can hear only the following kinds of cases:
Disputes regarding federal laws or constitutional issues
Disputes between residents of different states where the amount of money in
controversy is greater than $75,000 8
A court cannot hear cases that fall outside its functional or subject matter jurisdiction.
In addition to establishing the Supreme Court, Article III of the Constitution also
gives Congress the power to make as many lower-level federal courts as needed.
Under this power, Congress has established district courts, appellate courts, and
some specialized courts.
District courts are the lowest level of courts in the federal court system. There are
94 judicial districts in the United States, with each state having at least one judicial
district. Some states may be divided into many judicial districts, and each district
may have more than one judge. The number of judges in a district is determined by
the number of cases, or caseload, in the district. Usually only one judge hears a
case at the trial court level.
The district courts are the workhorses of the federal judicial system and serve as
courts of original jurisdiction. They might hear disputes between parties or conduct
criminal trials for violations of federal law. Each federal district court also has its own
bankruptcy court. The Constitution gives the federal government the sole power over
bankruptcy law.
The next level of courts is the intermediate appellate courts. In the federal
system, these courts are called the U.S. Courts of Appeals. There are 13 Courts of
Appeals. The 94 district courts are grouped into 12 geographical circuits. There is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.also one circuit, called the Federal Circuit, which hears cases from specialized
courts. The Courts of Appeals hear appeals from the district courts in their circuit.
For example, the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals hears cases from Illinois, Indiana,
and Wisconsin. The home for the Seventh Circuit is in Chicago, Illinois. The number
of judges in each circuit is determined by Congress. These courts usually hear cases
in three-judge panels.
NOTE
Federal question jurisdiction refers to the power of federal courts to hear only disputes about federal
laws or constitutional issues. Diversity of citizenship jurisdiction refers to the power of federal courts to
hear only disputes between citizens of different states that are above a certain dollar amount.
The Court of Appeals is a court of appellate jurisdiction. Courts of Appeals do
not review the facts of a case, nor do they accept any additional evidence for the
case. Instead, they review the record of the trial court only for mistakes of law.
The highest level of court in any judicial system, state or federal, is often called a
“court of last resort.” The highest court in the U.S. federal system is the U.S.
Supreme Court, a court of appellate jurisdiction. For the most part, the Supreme
Court decides cases on appeal from the U.S. Court of Appeals.
The Supreme Court reviews the decision of the lower court to make sure that it
complies with the law. The Supreme Court is under no obligation to review a
decision from the U.S. Court of Appeals. A party has to ask the Supreme Court to
review the case by using a petition called a writ of certiorari, which the Supreme
Court justices review. The Court usually approves the petition if four of the nine
justices decide that the Court should look at the case. The Court might decide to
hear a case if it presents a question of whether a federal law is unconstitutional. It
also might decide to hear a case if two or more of the federal appellate courts have
ruled differently on the same question of federal or U.S. Constitutional law.
The Supreme Court has exclusive original jurisdiction to decide cases about
disputes between state governments. It exercises concurrent jurisdiction with
federal district courts in some cases, and exercises this original jurisdiction very
rarely. Most of the cases heard before the Supreme Court are appeals cases.
The Supreme Court has the power to decide cases that involve questions about
the federal Constitution and other federal laws. It can review both state and federal
laws to make sure that those laws do not conflict with the U.S. Constitution. The
authority to review laws in this way is called judicial review. The Supreme Court is
the final authority on cases heard in the federal court system; as such, the decisions
of the U.S. Supreme Court cannot be appealed. FIGURE 3-1 shows the structure of
the U.S. federal court system.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.FIGURE 3-1
Structure of the U.S. federal court system.
Description
NOTE
In the law, an appeal is a formal request for a higher authority to review the decision of a lower court. Any
party who is unhappy with the judgment received in a district court can appeal to the Court of Appeals for
that district. The unhappy party must be able to show that the trial court made a legal error that affected
the holding, or decision, in the case.
State Government
In negotiating and drafting the U.S. Constitution, state governments gave up some of
their own power in order to create the federal government. They did this because the
first system of government after the American Revolution that was organized under
the Articles of Confederation did not work. That document did not create a national
government that could require unity on subjects of common interest. The U.S.
Constitution changed that relationship.
Under the Constitution, powers that are not specifically granted to the federal
government in the Constitution remain with the states. The Tenth Amendment to the
Constitution formalized this relationship. The Tenth Amendment says, “The powers
not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the
States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.” 9
State governments existed before the federal government as we know it today.
Similar to the federal government, most states are organized under a constitution,
which may vary widely from the U.S. Constitution. Although the federal Constitution
primarily describes the relationship between the federal government and the states,
state constitutions primarily describe the relationship between a state and its
citizens. For this reason, state constitutions often list many more individual rights
than are listed in the federal Constitution. State constitutions also tend to be longer
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.than the federal Constitution. Finally, state constitutions are generally easier to
change than the federal Constitution.
There are typically three branches to most state governments, roughly aligned in
the same manner as the federal government. Most state legislatures resemble the
legislative branch of the federal government and have two different legislative
chambers. A governor leads the state executive branch.
State governments have the general authority to govern and make laws for the
state and its citizens. However, this power is not absolute. The federal Supremacy
Clause limits this broad power to make laws. 10
The Supremacy Clause sets forth the rule that the federal Constitution, treaties,
and federal law outrank any conflicting state laws. This clause means that the U.S.
Constitution and federal laws are the highest laws in the land and states must follow
the federal laws. The clause permits states to make their own laws only so long as
those laws do not conflict with the U.S. Constitution or other federal laws. Because
the U.S. Constitution limits the federal government in the types of laws that it can
enact, there are still plenty of areas for state governments to legislate.
NOTE
The State of Alabama is widely recognized as having the longest state constitution. It has 799
amendments. The current constitution, adopted in 1901, is the state’s sixth constitution.
Most states have a judicial system that looks similar to the federal system, with a
system of trial courts, appellate courts, and courts of last resort. The trial courts, the
original jurisdiction courts for a state, are organized by geographical location, with
county-level courts being the typical entry-level courts for hearing most disputes.
Trial courts have the general authority to hear all sorts of cases, but they are usually
limited to hearing disputes between citizens of the state.
NOTE
Only the state of Nebraska has a unicameral legislature, meaning it has only one legislative chamber. All
other states have a bicameral legislature, meaning they have two chambers. The U.S. Congress is a
bicameral legislature.
States usually have two appellate courts: a state intermediate appellate court and
a state supreme court. States usually only have one type of each court. The
intermediate appellate courts hear appeals from the trial courts, whereas the state
supreme court hears appeals from the appellate court. It is important to remember
that not all states have the exact same structure, even though you can draw parallels
when discussing structure in general. These courts may go by different names in
different states. For example, the highest court in New York is called the New York
Court of Appeals. In many states, the court of appeals is the intermediate appellate
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.court. FIGURE 3-2 shows the general structure of a state court system.
FIGURE 3-2
General structure of the U.S. state court system.
Description
The relationship between the state and federal court systems is very interesting.
The U.S. Supreme Court has complete authority over courts in the federal system. It
also has complete authority over interpretations of federal law and the U.S.
Constitution. However, the Supreme Court has no authority over the organization or
procedures used by state courts. The Supreme Court may not interpret issues that
rely solely on state law or issues arising under state constitutions. Only the highest
court in a state is allowed to make interpretations about that state’s law.
Federal and state courts do not exist in separate spheres. State courts do have
the power and authority to review cases that concern issues of constitutional or
federal law.
However, the state courts must yield to the superiority and previous decisions of
the Supreme Court when doing so. The U.S. Supreme Court can review a state
court case in the event that the case concerns a question of federal law or a federal
constitutional issue. TABLE 3-2 compares the federal judicial system with a generic
state judicial system.
TABLE 3-2 A Comparison of the Federal and State Judicial Systems
STATE JUDICIAL SYSTEM
Courts of Original Jurisdiction
Trial courts
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.
FEDERAL JUDICIAL SYSTEM
U.S. District CourtsTrial courts U.S. District Courts
Courts of Appellate
Jurisdiction Intermediate appellate courts Circuit Courts of Appeal
Courts of Last Resort State supreme court U.S. Supreme Court
Scope of Authority General authority to hear all
disputes; authority is limited to
disputes involving state citizens Cases must involve a federal
question or involve disputes
between citizens of different states
and be over $75,000
Authority of Court of Last
Resort Final, unless the case involves a
federal question; if so, case can
be appealed to U.S. Supreme
Court Final
Courts of Original Jurisdiction
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.Sources of American Law
The law is not secret, but it is complex. Many of the processes and procedures in the
law have evolved over time. They are a combination of the will of the federal and
state governments, longstanding traditions about right and wrong, and society’s
values. It is no wonder that finding out what law applies to a particular situation is
sometimes puzzling.
This chapter has already discussed several sources of law:
U.S. Constitutional law
U.S. federal law
State constitutional law
State laws
Now it is time to put these sources in context for the American legal system. This
next section discusses the general sources of law and how they relate to one
another.
Common Law
The common law is a body of law that is developed through legal tradition and court
cases. The U.S. common law is a body of law and legal principles inherited from
England that changes very slowly—it develops as judges decide court cases.
Therefore, it is sometimes also known as case law or judge-made law.
In the common law, courts decide cases by referring to established legal
principles and the customs and values of society. They also look at decisions made
in earlier cases to see if the cases are similar. If the cases are similar, a new case
should reach a similar result. Finally, formal principles of logic and reason are used
to help reach a decision when the result is unclear.
Parties arguing a common law case use a similar approach. Attorneys may argue
that the customs and values of society have changed such that a new result is
appropriate. Attorneys also may attempt to distinguish the facts of the current case
from the facts of earlier cases. In all instances, attorneys must use logic and reason
to form the basis for their arguments.
The American legal system generally follows the common law tradition. Many
countries colonized by the English have adopted similar systems. After the
Revolutionary War, common law grew in America and was heavily influenced by
“new” American social and economic values. The common law has continued to
evolve, and judicial decisions continue to influence it. The development of the
common law continues so long as its decisions and conclusions are not in conflict
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.with other laws, such as constitutional documents or state and federal statutes.
Common law principles are often included within the code law of the federal or
state government. An example of this is privacy torts. There are four privacy torts
that came to be recognized as torts through the evolution of common law. Courts
gradually heard cases regarding issues related to the subject matter area of these
torts. As they heard the cases, some courts would recognize the tort and allow the
cause of action. Some would not. Gradually, many states adopted the four privacy
torts and some states have even written the torts into their statutes.
In the United States, the common law continues to be very influential in civil law
areas such as torts, contract law, and property law.
Code Law
Code law is law that is enacted by legislatures. It is also sometimes called statutory
law. This is the written law that is adopted by governments. In its truest form, code
law attempts to state the complete system of law for a state or federal government.
Citizens and members of the legal profession are all bound by the terms of the
written law.
In the United States, the common law and code law work together in most states
to form the laws that society must follow. There has been a strong movement within
the law to codify the common law. This is to help make sure that citizens understand
the law. Many states have codified their common law criminal principles into written
law. Some states also have codified parts of their civil (noncriminal) laws. Once a
code or statute provision is made that addresses the common law, it supersedes the
common law in that area. The principles and traditions of common law are
transformed into a code of laws.
NOTE
No discussion of the law would be complete without a Latin phrase or two. Code law is called lex scripta,
meaning law that is written down. Common law is called lex non scripta, meaning law that is not written
down.
Constitutional Law
The U.S. Constitution is the final source of authority for issues involving U.S. federal
laws. When federal laws are disputed, they are subject to scrutiny to determine
whether the law is constitutional. If the law is not constitutional, it is invalid. If the law
is constitutional, then it is the source of authority for its particular subject matter.
NOTE
Louisiana is the only state that does not base its law on common law principles. Instead, the laws of the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.state are based upon the Napoleonic Code, which is the French civil code.
Similarly, state constitutions are the final source of authority for issues involving
state law. So long as the state constitutional provision itself is not in conflict with the
U.S. Constitution or federal law, then it will be the final decision on state laws. If a
state law is constitutional (under both the state and, if challenged, U.S. Constitution),
then it is the source of state authority for its particular subject.
How Does It All Fit Together?
The American legal system contains many different levels of written (codified) and
unwritten (uncodified) laws. This is why it is sometimes hard to figure out what the
“law” is with respect to a new situation. When an attorney or judge has to analyze
the law that applies to a certain situation, he or she applies the rules of statutory
construction for looking at an issue. The rules of statutory construction generally
mean that the laws of the legislature (code law) are given greater deference than the
laws of the courts (common law). If codes are in conflict with the common law, then
the text of the code should control the outcome of the case. The problem in analysis
occurs when a code has ambiguous terms.
When reviewing a legal issue, an attorney or court might start by first reviewing
whether the issue involves a question that can be answered by the U.S. Constitution
or a state constitution. If the legal issue involves a question of federal law, the U.S.
Constitution is the first authority that should be consulted. The same principle applies
for questions of state law.
If the legal issue cannot be resolved by looking at constitutional laws, the next
step is to look at the code law. For federal issues, federal statutes would be
reviewed. For state issues, state statutes would be reviewed. The attorney or court
will look to see that the issue fits clearly within the scope of the code law. If the issue
is clearly resolved by looking at code, then the analysis is complete.
When the issue cannot be resolved by looking at the code, attorneys and lawyers
turn to the common law to find the guidance needed to resolve the case. For federal
issues, federal common law doctrine and federal court cases need to be reviewed.
For state issues, state common law doctrines and court cases need to be reviewed.
Key in the review of common law is the influential role of precedent, which is
discussed later in this chapter.
NOTE
Legal issues are rarely resolved simply by looking at statutes. If they were, there would be little need for
attorneys or courts. Often a statute is poorly written. For example, its terms and provisions could be
ambiguous or open to interpretation. Sometimes statute writers simply do not anticipate the legal issue
that is being considered. Attorneys and courts are needed to resolve ambiguities and new legal issues.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.Types of Law
The legal system usually distinguishes between procedural law and substantive
law. Substantive law is also known as subject matter law. Subject matter areas of
law are areas in which an attorney might specialize. For instance, contract law, tort
law, elder law, and intellectual property law are just some of the many different
subject matter areas within the study of law. Attorneys often choose to specialize in a
particular area of law simply because there are so many areas of study within the
law.
This section discusses the different types of procedural law. Procedural law deals
with the processes that courts use to decide cases. Procedural areas of the law are
designated to ensure due process, which means that all parties in a case are
entitled to a fair and consistent process within the courts. There are three types of
procedural law:
Criminal
Civil
Administrative
Civil
Civil procedure deals with the procedures and processes that courts use to conduct
civil trials. Civil trials concern claims between individuals. Substantive areas of law
such as contract law and property law are civil law areas. The parties in these types
of cases must follow civil procedure rules when bringing disputes to court.
In the federal courts, a case begins when a complaint is filed with the court. A
complaint is a court document that sets forth the names of the parties and the facts
and legal claims. This is how a lawsuit begins.
In the federal system, the rules outlining the civil trial process are found in the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. These rules are made by the Supreme Court and
approved by Congress. State courts also have rules for how civil trials are
conducted. Often state rules are based upon the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
These rules were last updated in 2018.
NOTE
The rules for civil procedure can be complicated. The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure has 86 regular
rules (not including special rules for admiralty or maritime claims).
Most civil trial cases must be proven by a preponderance of the evidence. This
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.is the lowest level of proof in a civil case. Preponderance of the evidence means that
it is more probable than not that an action (or wrong) took place. Although it is
simplistic to express this standard as a percentage, preponderance of the evidence
means the probability of an action taking place is greater than 50 percent. Some civil
cases, such as actions to terminate parental rights, use the “clear and convincing
evidence” standard. To meet this standard, a party must convince a court that it is
more likely than not that an action (or wrong) took place.
Criminal
Criminal procedure deals with the rules that courts follow in criminal law cases. It
also includes the processes for investigating and punishing crimes. The federal and
state governments have criminal codes. These codes specify the actions that
constitute a crime.
Crimes are wrongs against society and are prosecuted by the government
against an alleged wrongdoer. The federal or state official with the power to pursue
criminal cases is called a prosecutor.
In the federal system, the rules outlining the criminal trial process are called the
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. State courts also have rules for how criminal
trials are conducted. Most states have rules that are modeled after the federal rules.
Most criminal law cases are tried in front of a jury, which decides questions of fact.
The judge’s role is to watch over the proceedings and decide questions of law.
The standard of proof for most criminal cases is beyond a reasonable doubt.
This is the highest level of persuasion that a prosecutor must meet. This burden is
met when a prosecutor proves to a jury that there can be no reasonable doubt in the
mind of a reasonable person that a defendant is guilty. The reasonable doubt
standard does not mean that the reasonable juror is 100 percent convinced that a
defendant is guilty. It does mean, however, that a juror must be fully satisfied that
reasonable doubt has been eliminated.
Burdens of Proof in the O.J. Simpson Trials
The different burdens of proof for different types of cases can be confusing. The O.J. Simpson criminal and
civil trials best illustrate the basic difference between criminal and civil law.
In June 1994, Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman were murdered. Five days later O.J. Simpson
was arrested for those murders. Simpson pleaded “not guilty” to the charges in late July 1994. In October
1995, a criminal jury announced that it found O.J. Simpson “not guilty” of the murders.
In May 1995, the Goldman family and Nicole Brown Simpson’s estate filed civil wrongful death actions
against O.J. Simpson. In February 1997, the civil jury found Simpson liable for the deaths of Ronald Goldman
and Nicole Brown Simpson. Finding a defendant liable in a civil case is the rough equivalent of a guilty finding
in a criminal case. It means that the defendant is held responsible for the action that is complained about.
O.J. Simpson was found “not guilty” of murder in the criminal case, but he was found liable in the civil case.
The reason for the apparently inconsistent results is that the murder case was tried in the criminal system
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.and the wrongful death case was a civil action. There are different burdens of proof in each system.
A government has such a high burden of proof to meet in criminal cases because
a criminal penalty usually includes jail time, financial penalties, or even a death
sentence. These penalties infringe on fundamental rights to liberty, property, and life.
Therefore, a government may impose these penalties only with very strong proof
that a person has committed the crime.
Administrative
Administrative procedure sets forth the process under which administrative
agencies make and enforce rules. The federal government and most states delegate
some regulatory and enforcement functions to administrative agencies.
Governments delegate some of these functions in very detailed ways and for very
specific reasons. When governments delegate power in this way, it is possible to
have an agency that creates rules (a legislative function), enforces rules (an
executive function), and reviews rules (a judicial power). Agency power is a
combination of the power of all three branches of government.
The actions of these agencies are the focus of administrative procedure.
Because these agencies are carrying out a function of the government, there must
be processes put in place to ensure that all persons appearing before agencies are
dealt with in a fair and consistent manner. At the federal government level, the
Administrative Procedure Act (1946) helps define the federal administrative process.
This act states the procedures for agency rulemaking, enforcement, and review.
The Administrative Procedure Act also allows U.S. federal courts to review
agency decisions. There is a different burden of proof for administrative cases. In
these cases, an administrative decision is valid so long as it is not “arbitrary and
capricious” or an abuse of the law. An arbitrary and capricious decision is one made
without a reasonable connection between the facts of the case and the
administrative outcome.
FIGURE 3-3 shows the burden-of-proof hierarchy in administrative, civil, and
criminal cases.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.FIGURE 3-3
Burden-of-proof hierarchy.
Description
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.The Role of Precedent
The doctrine of precedent is one of the most important traditions in the American
legal system. This doctrine means that courts will look at the decisions made in prior
cases to determine the appropriate resolution for new cases.
For example, the U.S. Supreme Court has the power to decide cases that involve
questions about the federal Constitution and other federal laws. The Supreme Court
is the final authority on cases heard in the federal court system. If other, lower courts
in the federal system have a new case that concerns an issue that the Supreme
Court has already addressed, those lower courts are required to follow the law as it
was interpreted by the Supreme Court. State courts also must follow the decisions of
the U.S. Supreme Court to the extent that the state court is reviewing issues that
include U.S. constitutional or federal law.
NOTE
A case of first impression is a case for which there is no precedent. These cases raise a legal issue that
has never before been decided.
The doctrine of precedent also is referred to as the doctrine of stare decisis,
which means “to stand by things decided” in Latin. Stare decisis means that lower
courts must follow the decisions of the court above it so long as those decisions are
relevant to the case that the lower court is deciding.
Without precedent and its related concepts, there can be no predictability in the
law. Precedent makes the law stable. The U.S. Supreme Court has recognized the
value of precedent numerous times. In 1932, Justice Louis Brandeis stressed the
importance of precedent when he wrote, “Stare decisis is usually the wise policy,
because in most matters it is more important that the applicable rule of law be settled
than that it be settled right.” 11 Precedent is used to ensure that laws are fairly and
consistently applied.
The doctrine of precedent is not absolute. Precedent can change when it is
apparent that society’s values on a particular issue have changed. Precedent also
can change when a high court finds that the application of precedent is
unreasonable. In Payne v. Tennessee (1991), Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote,
“Adhering to precedent is usually the wise policy, because, in most matters, it is
more important that the applicable rule of law be settled than it be settled right.
Nevertheless, when governing decisions are unworkable or are badly reasoned, this
Court has never felt constrained to follow precedent. Stare decisis is not an
inexorable command; rather, it is a principle of policy and not a mechanical formula
of adherence to the latest decision.” 12
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.NOTE
A landmark court decision is a decision that establishes new precedent. Landmark cases can significantly
change how the legal system views and interprets the law. Many of the cases discussed in this book are
landmark cases.
Overturning precedent is a milestone event for the law because it changes
established legal principles. In essence, it changes the rules that judges and lawyers
follow. Plessy v. Ferguson (1896) and Brown v. Board of Education (1954) are two
cases that dramatically illustrate how precedent changes as society evolves.
In Plessy v. Ferguson, the U.S. Supreme Court legalized racial segregation
practices. These practices also were known as “separate but equal” practices. In this
case, Homer Plessy boarded a train in Louisiana. Plessy was seven-eighths white
and one-eighth black. He sat in the whites-only train car. Louisiana law considered
Plessy to be black and required him to sit in the blacks-only train car. Plessy refused
and was subsequently arrested.
In Plessy, the plaintiff argued that these separate but equal practices violated the
Fourteenth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. The Fourteenth Amendment
requires that all citizens be provided equal protection under law. In its decision, the
Court held that separate but equal practices, such as having train cars segregated
based upon race, were not inherently unequal. The Court stated that these practices
did not violate the U.S. Constitution. For almost 60 years, “separate but equal” was
the law. The court’s ruling was used to justify several discriminatory “Jim Crow”
segregation laws used throughout the United States that segregated blacks and
whites in schools, restaurants, restrooms, and public transportation. These laws
were challenged again in the 1954 case, Brown v. Board of Education.
The Brown case was a consolidation of five different cases from four different
states that all addressed the same issue: racial segregation in public schools. In
Brown, the plaintiffs argued that “separate but equal” practices were inherently
unfair. They argued that in reality these practices perpetuated the inferior treatment
of blacks and had a negative impact on black Americans. Plaintiffs, represented by
the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP),
challenged the Court to overrule the precedent set in Plessy v. Ferguson.
In Brown, a unanimous U.S. Supreme Court reversed its holding in Plessy. In
Brown, Chief Justice Warren wrote, “We conclude that, in the field of public
education, the doctrine of ‘separate but equal’ has no place. Separate educational
facilities are inherently unequal. Therefore, we hold that the plaintiffs and others
similarly situated for whom the actions have been brought are, by reason of the
segregation complained of, deprived of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed
by the Fourteenth Amendment.” 13
The Brown decision was remarkable because the Court departed from the
precedent set in Plessy. In fact, the Court specifically rejected the reasoning that it
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.had used to support its decision in Plessy. Brown established new legal precedent,
that separate but equal laws are unconstitutional.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.Regulatory Authorities
As discussed in the administrative procedure section, the federal government
delegates some regulatory and enforcement functions to administrative agencies,
typically subject matter expert agencies. These delegations are made because it
would be impossible for Congress to make timely laws in some of the many different
areas that are regulated by the federal government.
According to the federal Administrative Procedure Act, an agency is any
government authority besides Congress and the courts. Federal agencies fall under
the executive branch of the government and are used to help carry out the day-to-
day activities of the government. Agencies may have many different functions. For
example, many of the laws in the United States are actually administered by
regulatory agencies. These agencies create rules, enforce compliance, and hand out
sanctions within their specified area.
The president usually has the responsibility for overseeing the federal agencies.
Federal agencies also can be created under other federal agencies. For instance,
the U.S. Department of Agriculture oversees several different federal agencies.
NOTE
The oldest federal law enforcement agency is typically recognized as the U.S. Marshals Service, which
was formed in 1789.
Congress also can create independent agencies that report directly to it. One
such independent federal agency is the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). Its
mission is to promote consumer protection and eliminate practices that are harmful
to competitive business in many areas of the economy. The FTC, created in 1914
under the Federal Trade Commission Act, is one of the most important regulatory
authorities for consumer and some business practices issues, including online
business practices.
The FTC reports to Congress on its actions. The FTC is led by five
commissioners, who each serve a 7-year term. The commissioners are nominated
by the president and confirmed by the Senate. The president also chooses one
commissioner to act as chairman. To maintain the independence of the Commission,
no more than three commissioners can belong to the same political party. The FTC
has seven regional offices across the United States.
Most federal agencies have the ability to make rules. The rulemaking authority of
the FTC is described in the Federal Trade Commission Act, which states that the
FTC can make “rules which define with specificity acts or practices which are unfair
or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce.” 14 The Act states the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.process for how the rules are made. After the FTC makes a rule, anyone who
violates the rule can be sanctioned by the FTC.
Regulatory authorities provide another type of law that must be considered when
thinking about the American legal system. These administrative agencies have the
power to create and enforce regulations that are considered equal to the law passed
by the federal government. Individuals and organizations can be subject to penalties
for violating agency rules.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.What Is the Difference Between Compliance
and Audit?
People often get compliance and audit confused, so it is helpful to understand these
terms because you will encounter them often. Audit and compliance are often
associated with legal activities, which is why they are included in this chapter.
In the legal system, compliance is the action of following applicable laws and
rules and regulations. Generally speaking, for an organization compliance involves
not only following laws and regulations, but also following the organization’s own
policies and procedures. Compliance must be documented. With respect to law, it is
not enough to say that an organization is compliant. The organization must prove
that it is compliant.
Processes that might be used to demonstrate compliance include:
Creating policies or other organizational governance documents to comply with
legal or regulatory requirements
Comparing compliance requirements against an organization’s daily practices, and
modifying those practices as needed
Developing and implementing monitoring systems in computer systems to alert the
organization if security measures required by law or regulation are compromised
Creating training and awareness activities that educate employees about
compliance requirements
Compliance not only includes the actual state of being compliant, but it also includes
the steps and processes taken to become compliant. Compliance usually asks the
questions: “What are the rules?” and “How must the rules be followed?” Compliance
is demonstrated daily through processes and procedures.
Audit is separate from compliance. An audit is an evaluation and verification that
certain objectives are met. An audit can review laws, rules, regulations, policies, and
procedures to ensure that an organization is complying with stated requirements.
Audit looks at the processes that are put in place to meet compliance objectives and
makes sure that those processes are accurate and are actually followed.
Audits may occasionally be performed by independent organizations. An
organization also can have an internal audit function that ensures that organizations
are following its internal policies and procedures.
An audit is an inspection at a fixed point in time. In the truest sense of the word,
audits do not take place daily. An audit usually asks the questions: “Are the rules
being followed?” and “How are the rules being followed?”
Sometimes it is helpful to consider an example. Under the FTC’s Red Flags
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.Rule, 15 for instance, a covered organization is required to have a written identity theft
prevention program. The program that is developed must provide for the
identification, detection, and response to activities that could indicate identity theft.
The compliance functions that must be met include:
Identify activities that could indicate identity theft.
Determine how the organization will detect such activities.
Determine how the organization will respond to such activities.
Create a written identity theft prevention program.
Educate employees about their responsibilities in the identity theft prevention
program.
The questions that would be verified in an audit include:
Did the organization properly identify activities that could indicate identity theft?
Did the organization properly determine how it will detect such activities?
Are the organization’s responses to activities appropriate to prevent identity theft?
Did the organization create a written identity theft program?
Was the identity theft program approved by management?
Are employees meeting their responsibilities under the identity theft prevention
program?
Compliance is demonstrated by the processes and procedures that an organization
uses to meet the law. Audit verifies that those processes and procedures actually do
satisfy the legal requirements.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.How Do Security, Privacy, and Compliance Fit
Together?
Security, privacy, and compliance issues form a complicated web. Information
security is the practice of protecting information to ensure the goals of confidentiality,
integrity, and availability. Information security makes sure that accurate information is
available to authorized individuals when it is needed.
In contrast, privacy encompasses people’s right to have control of their personal
data. Privacy means that a person has the right to specify how his or her data is
collected, used, and shared. Information security practices can be used to make
sure that a person’s privacy decisions are respected.
NOTE
Compliance requirements are often understood as the minimum level of action that a person or
organization must take to meet legal or regulatory requirements. However, nothing prevents a person or
organization from creating good information security or privacy practices that exceed legal minimum
requirements. In fact, having good practices that exceed the minimum requirements set in applicable law
or regulations is often seen as a competitive advantage.
Organizations do not always do a good job of either information security or
protecting privacy. For that reason, laws are enacted that force organizations to take
a more structured approach to information security and privacy. To date, there have
been no laws enacted in the United States that comprehensively address information
security or data privacy. Instead, laws are made to protect certain types of
information on an industry basis, such as laws regulating health data for the
healthcare industry. Organizations that hold or process those types of information
must follow the relevant laws. This text discusses some of these laws in the following
chapters.
When laws addressing information security or data privacy are enacted,
organizations impacted by these laws must take actions to meet them. If an
organization fails to meet its obligations, it can be subject to sanctions. Compliance
is the action of following the applicable laws and rules and regulations. Compliance
efforts are supported by documenting organizational controls and enhancing the
capabilities of information systems to ensure information security.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.CHAPTER SUMMARY
The American legal system, its history, and its processes regulate our
behavior and contribute to an ordered society. Laws evolve over time. The
American legal system is a reflection of the laws imposed by federal and
state governments, longstanding traditions about right and wrong, and
society’s values.
Individuals and organizations must follow laws, rules, and regulations.
Regulatory compliance is influencing security and privacy practices.
Organizations must take a more structured approach to addressing
information security and privacy issues in order to meet their compliance
requirements.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Administrative procedure
Appellate jurisdiction
Audit
Beyond a reasonable doubt
Civil procedure
Code law
Compliance
Concurrent jurisdiction
Criminal procedure
Diversity of citizenship jurisdiction
Due process
Federal question jurisdiction
Judicial review
Jurisdiction
Original jurisdiction
Precedent
Preemption
Preponderance of the evidence
Procedural law
Substantive law
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.CHAPTER 3 ASSESSMENT
1. What is the U.S. federal court of last resort?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The U.S. Supremacy Court
The U.S. District Court
The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals
The Federal Court of Appeals
The U.S. Supreme Court
2. What is judicial review?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The power of courts to review the decisions of other courts
The power of courts to review laws
The power of the president to review the decisions of the courts
The power of Congress to review the decisions of the courts
A variety show featuring people in wigs and black robes
3. What is appellate jurisdiction?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The power of some courts to review the decisions of others
The power of courts to resolve disputes between individuals
The process by which courts conduct civil trials
The process by which courts conduct criminal trials
The power of courts to declare a law unconstitutional
4. What article of the U.S. Constitution sets forth the powers of the president?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Article V
Article IV
Article III
Article II
Article I
5. What is a case of first impression?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
The first case that court hears when it is in session
A case that changes established precedent
A case for which there is no established precedent
A case that is appealed
None of these is correct.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.6. The Federal Trade Commission is which type of federal agency?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Independent
Subordinate
Coordinate
Executive
Congressional
7. The doctrine of precedent is also known as ________.
8. What is procedural law?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Branches of law that deal with property cases
Branches of law that set forth the structure of the judiciary system
Branches of law that deal with following precedent
Branches of law that deal with processes that courts use to decide cases
None of these is correct.
9. What is common law?
A.
B.
C.
D.
A system of law inherited from England
A system of law inherited from France
A system of law that relies upon established legal principles and traditions
A system of law inherited from France and a system of law that relies upon
established legal principles and traditions
E. A system of law inherited from England and a system of law that relies upon
established legal principles and traditions
10. Compliance is ________, audit is ________.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Following the rules, verifying that the rules were followed
Verifying that the rules were followed, following the rules
Making the rules, enforcing the rules
Enforcing the rules, making the rules
None of these is correct.
11. A federal agency is granted its authority by ________.
12. Which U.S. Constitution clause describes Congress’ authority to regulate trade
between states?
A.
B.
C.
D.
The Supremacy Clause
The Necessary and Proper Clause
The Limitation of Powers Clause
The Commerce Clause
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.E. The Impeachment Clause
13. The U.S. Supreme Court has ________ justices.
14. How many representatives are in the U.S. House of Representatives?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
100
1,000
435
400
50
15. There are ________ federal district courts.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.ENDNOTES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
U.S. Constitution, article VI.
U.S. Constitution, article II, sec. 1.
U.S. Constitution, article I, sec. 3.
U.S. Constitution, article I, sec. 2.
U.S. Constitution, article I, sec. 8, cl. 3.
U.S. Constitution, article I, sec. 8, cl. 18.
An entire generation of Americans learned about the lawmaking process from
Schoolhouse Rock!, which was a series of animated educational videos about
basic topics. You can watch the “I’m Just a Bill” video on YouTube at:
https://youtu.be/FFroMQlKiag.
U.S. Code Vol. 28, sec. 1332.
U.S. Constitution, amendment X.
U.S. Constitution, article VI, sec. 2.
Burnet v. Coronado Oil & Gas Co., 285 U.S. 393, 406 (1932) (Justice Louis
Brandeis dissenting).
Payne v. Tennessee, 501 U.S. 808, 809 (1991) (internal citations and
punctuation omitted).
Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483, 495 (1954).
Federal Trade Commission Act (1914), U.S. Code Vol. 15, sec. 57a (2006).
Identity Theft Red Flags Rule, Code of Federal Regulations, Title 16, sec. 681.2.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.PART II
Laws Influencing Information Security
CHAPTER 4 Security and Privacy of Consumer Financial Information
CHAPTER 5 Security and Privacy of Information Belonging to
Children and in Educational Records
CHAPTER 6 Security and Privacy of Health Information
CHAPTER 7 Corporate Information Security and Privacy Regulation
CHAPTER 8 Federal Government Information Security and Privacy
Regulations
CHAPTER 9 State Laws Protecting Citizen Information and Breach
Notification Laws
CHAPTER 10 Intellectual Property Laws
CHAPTER 11 The Role of Contracts
CHAPTER 12 Criminal Law and Tort Law Issues in Cyberspace
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:39:05.
