CHAPTER
10
Intellectual Property Law
NTELLECTUAL PROPERTY (IP) is the area of law that protects a person’s
creative ideas, inventions, and innovations. It protects people’s ownership rights in
their creative ideas, gives them the right to control the use of their creative ideas,
and protects their ability to profit from those ideas. It also prevents other people from
exploiting a person’s creative ideas.
I
IP protection in the United States has a long history. In fact, the U.S. Constitution
recognizes the importance of protecting IP. This chapter reviews the major ways you
can protect IP. It also reviews the role of information technology in IP issues.
Chapter 10 Topics
This chapter covers the following topics and concepts:
Why intellectual property law is important
What the concept of legal ownership is
What the basics of patent protection are
What the basics of trademark protection are
What the basics of copyright protection are
What the basics of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) are
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.What some case studies and examples are
Chapter 10 Goals
When you complete this chapter, you will be able to:
Describe the importance of intellectual property law
Explain the basic concept of legal ownership
Explain how patents are used and what they protect
Explain how trademarks are used and what they protect
Explain how copyrights are used and what they protect
Describe intellectual property concerns with respect to internet use
Describe the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and what it
protects
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.The Digital Wild West and the Importance of
Intellectual Property Law
It is hard to know who coined the term Digital Wild West. It is clear, however, that the
term is a good description for the state of the World Wide Web (WWW, or “web”)
today. Similar to the American “Wild West” in the latter half of the 19th century, the
web still has a frontier. Its outer limits are unknown.
The web and our use of it are still changing and evolving. More people are
accessing the internet and using the web than ever before. World internet usage
grew over 1,167 percent between the years 2000 and 2020. 1 Many different devices
can access the internet, which has led to a new term, the Internet of Things (IoT).
The IoT refers generally to the devices that collect and share data over the internet.
Cell phones, smartphones, netbooks, and televisions all access the internet, as do
healthcare devices, fitness trackers, home automation systems, and even
appliances! People (and devices) can access the internet and web anytime, and
from anywhere.
NOTE
The World Wide Web is a system of linked hypertext documents and other media that are connected
through the internet. Even though we refer to them as one and the same, the internet and the World Wide
Web are not the same. The internet is the infrastructure, whereas the web resides on the infrastructure.
We are still exploring how to use the web. Organizations are learning how to
effectively and efficiently conduct business online, although some businesses
already conduct all of their commerce online. People are joining social networking
groups and taking many aspects of their lives “online.” Many people share novel
ideas and champion social causes online. Art and inventions are shared online as
well.
One traditional area of law that is adapting to new issues raised through
technology is intellectual property (IP) law. Intellectual property (IP) is the area of
law that protects a person’s creative ideas, inventions, and innovations once they
are in a physical form. When materials are published on the web, they are in a
physical form. Traditional legal concepts about IP ownership and how to protect it
are applied to content on the World Wide Web.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Legal Ownership and the Importance of
Protecting Intellectual Property
A legal owner of property has the right to use it in any way he or she wants to, and
the power to give those rights to another. This is a property interest. It means that
the owner has certain rights to property, and a court will enforce those rights if
necessary. There are several different types of property ownership:
Real property interest—This type of property interest means that a person owns
land or buildings.
Personal property interest—This type of property interest means that a person
owns physical possessions such as cars, books, and silverware.
IP interest—This type of property interest means that a person owns some sort of
creation. Creations include items such as art, designs, images, and inventions.
NOTE
Corporations and businesses also can own property. So can governments. In the context of property law, a
person is a real person or other legal entity. Legal entities include corporations, businesses, private
organizations, and governments.
Owners of property can control how it is used. Ownership is an important concept for
IP because an IP owner has certain exclusive rights. An owner, the person who
created new works or inventions, is the only one who has these rights. Courts will
enforce these rights, and can punish people who violate these rights.
The federal government determines many IP law rules in the United States. The
U.S. Constitution specifically grants the power to do this. The Constitution grants
Congress the power to “promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing
for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective
writings and discoveries.” 2 The drafters of the Constitution wanted to encourage
innovation and discovery. To do this, they specifically said that authors and inventors
must have the exclusive right to control their creations and inventions for a certain
period.
The exclusive right to control how creations and inventions are used is the main
purpose of IP law. Creators have a right to control how their creations are used for a
certain period of time depending upon the underlying nature of the creation. Different
laws protect inventions and literary works for different periods.
During the protected period, the creator or author of a work or invention is the
only person who can use or reproduce it. This allows authors and inventors to profit
from their creative efforts. People would not be encouraged to write new books or
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.create new inventions if they did not have an opportunity to profit from their efforts.
IP law protects these efforts. It also encourages them to continue to create.
Ultimately, this helps the economy.
The federal law recognizes the following types of IP:
Patents—Used to protect inventions such as machines, processes, designs, and
specialized plants.
Trademarks—Used to protect words, logos, symbols, or slogans that identify a
product or service.
Copyrights—Used to protect books, art, music, videos, computer programs, and
other creative works.
Each type of IP right is demonstrated in a different way. Each applies to different
types of creations and inventions. They give protection for different lengths of times.
They also have different requirements for establishing and enforcing IP rights.
NOTE
Trademarks have the longest protection period. They are protected as long as an owner continues to use it
in commerce.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Patents
A patent is an IP right granted by the federal government. The U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (USPTO) grants patents. The USPTO is an agency located in the
Department of Commerce.
NOTE
The National Inventors Hall of Fame and Museum is located at the USPTO in Alexandria, Virginia.
FYI
Congress enacted the most recent version of U.S. patent law in the Patent Act of 1952. 3 Congress has
amended this law several times. The most recent amendment to U.S. patent law was in 2011. In 2011, the
America Invents Act (AIA) 4 introduced significant changes to U.S. patent law. Before March 2013, the
United States followed a “first to invent” rule. This meant that the first person to invent something and
show that it works could patent it. This rule had been in effect for more than 200 years.
The AIA drastically changed this rule. Starting in March 2013, the U.S. adopted a “first to file” system. This
means that the first person to file for a patent has priority over all other people who have a similar idea.
The change in the filing rules is meant to encourage inventors to patent their ideas sooner. It is intended to
encourage innovation. It also aligns the United States with other countries, most of which follow “first to
file” rules.
Patents are granted to encourage new and useful inventions. Patent owners
have the right to keep others from making or using the patented invention. They also
have the power to stop others from selling their invention. There are three basic
types of patents:
NOTE
The USPTO granted 370,434 patents in 2019. Most of those patents were utility patents. 5
Utility patents
Plant patents
Design patents
Utility patents, which are issued for inventions and discoveries, are the most
common type of patents. There are four main categories of utility patents:
Machines
Manufactured products
Processes
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Compositions of matter
Improvements on any of the items in the previous list can also be patented. Utility
patents are granted for a 20-year term that begins running on the date that the
patent is granted.
Under patent law, a machine is an instrument or tool that completes a task by
using moving parts. These parts interact with each other to accomplish a function.
Machines are things such as lawnmowers, elevators, and automatic can openers.
Devices that work because of an electrical process, such as computers, also fall into
this category.
NOTE
A manufactured product is called an article of manufacture in patent law.
Manufactured products are products without moving parts. A milk carton is an
example of a manufactured product. Although a manufactured product may have
moving parts, the moving parts do not act together to accomplish a task. A folding
table, even though it has moving parts, is a manufactured product. It is not a
machine.
A process, also called a method, is a way of completing a task through a series of
steps or actions. A process can be patented as a utility patent. A recipe might be
patentable as a process, and some types of computer software may be patentable
as processes as well.
A composition of matter is a chemical compound consisting of two or more
substances combined to make something new. Manufacturers patent new drugs
under this subcategory of utility patents. Naturally occurring chemical compounds
are not patentable. For instance, the air is not patentable.
The second type of patent is plant patents. Plant patents are granted to an
inventor who invents or discovers a new variety of plant. However, the inventor must
prove that he or she can asexually reproduce the new plant. Asexual reproduction
means that the plant is reproduced through cutting or grafting. Plants that grow from
seeds do not reproduce asexually. Also, plants that are found in nature are not
patentable. A plant patent can protect special kinds of hybridized plants or food
crops. Plant patents, once granted, last for 20 years.
The last type of patent is design patents. Design patents are granted for new
and original ornamental designs for manufactured objects. A design is apparent in
appearance. They are used to protect the visual appearance of an object. For
example, a design patent could protect the design for china or silverware. A design
must be new and different from other designs to be patentable in this way. Design
patents are granted for 14 years.
A design patent is different from a utility patent. Design patents protect only the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.appearance of an article, whereas a utility patent protects how the article works.
Unless otherwise noted, this chapter discusses utility patents.
Patent Basics
Inventions or discoveries must be patentable in order to be protected. To be
patentable, they must meet certain requirements. An inventor must meet all of the
requirements in a patent application.
Patent Requirements
To be patentable, an invention or discovery must be:
Novel
Useful
Non-obvious
To be patentable, an invention or discovery must be novel. 6 This means that it must
be a new invention or discovery. The USPTO will not issue a patent for an item that
is not new. To be considered new, an invention must be different from the prior art,
or public knowledge about an invention that existed before the date upon which a
patent application is filed. An invention or discovery must include elements that
make it different from the prior art. An invention or discovery that merely contains
prior art is not new and is not patentable.
The USPTO also looks at whether the invention was used in the United States or
other countries before the date of the patent application. It also reviews whether the
invention was patented or published in other countries. If people know about the
invention or discovery in other places, then it is not new.
NOTE
A different federal law governs plants that grow from seeds. The Plant Variety Protection Act of 1970
protects these types of plants. 7
U.S. patent law does allow a limited exception to this general rule. It allows a 1-
year grace period for inventions made available to the public, 9 which means that an
inventor must file for a patent within 1 year of announcing the invention to the public.
In some cases, an inventor may want to announce an invention or discovery before
applying for a patent. Inventors do this to see if there is commercial interest in the
invention. An invention or discovery is still patentable in the United States if the
inventor files a patent application within 1 year of announcing it. The USPTO will not
consider a patent application if it is submitted more than 1 year after the invention is
announced.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.NOTE
In order to be patentable, the subject matter of an invention or discovery also must be patentable. The
U.S. Supreme Court held in Diamond v. Chakrabarty (1980) that patentable subject matter is “anything
under the sun that is made by man.” 8 Some types of items are not patentable—including objects found in
nature.
Taking advantage of the 1-year grace period can be risky for an inventor because
another person might see the invention and build upon it. If that person files for a
patent before the first inventor, then the first inventor might lose the ability to patent
his or her invention. This is because, in the United States, the first person to file for a
patent has priority over all patents that claim a similar invention. In this example, the
second inventor’s patent application contains material that is considered prior art
when the first inventor files his or her patent application later. The rules for
determining priority in a patent application are very tricky, which is why many
inventors hire attorneys to help them navigate the patent process.
NOTE
Under the laws of many countries, if an inventor announces or sells an invention to the public before it is
patented, it automatically becomes not patentable. The United States modifies this very strict rule with a
limited 1-year grace period.
The second patentability requirement is that an invention or discovery be useful. 10
This requirement is also called utility. An inventor can meet this requirement by
showing that the invention or discovery is beneficial to society. The inventor also
must show that the invention actually works. The USPTO may reject patent
applications that do not show that an invention or discovery is useful. It also can
reject patent applications where the claimed usefulness seems implausible.
The final patentability requirement is that the invention or discovery must be non-
obvious. 11 This requirement is closely related to the “novelty” requirement. If an
invention or discovery is not obvious, then it is patentable. Obvious inventions or
discoveries are not patentable.
FYI
Judge Learned Hand was a U.S. federal court judge who served for the U.S. District Court for the
Southern District of New York. He also served as a judge on the Second Circuit Court of Appeals. Courts
and attorneys often quote his opinions on patent and copyright law. Judge Hand wrote very clearly on a
complicated topic.
How Do You Protect Inventions Internationally?
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.In the United States, inventors register their patents with the USPTO. However, the USPTO patent rights
apply only to the United States. They do not protect patents in foreign countries. If a person or business
wishes to protect an invention in other countries, a foreign patent is needed.
Different countries have very different patent laws. Because countries have different patent laws, they enter
into international treaties to try to put all inventors on an even playing field for protecting their inventions
internationally.
The Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1883) was the first treaty to try to address
patents on an international level. This treaty is important because it fixes the filing date of patent applications
to the date that the inventor first files a patent application in his or her home country.
The Paris Convention says that someone who files for a patent in his or her home country can use that filing
date with other member nations to establish his or her patent’s priority in those nations. This protects an
inventor’s “place in line” in other countries. This priority right is available for only 12 months after the very first
patent application. If an inventor wants to protect an invention in other countries, he or she must file patent
applications in those countries within 12 months of first filing for a patent in the home country. Inventors who
do not file within 12 months lose their place in line for determining patent ownership.
The United States joined the Paris Convention in 1887. The Paris Convention establishes only the priority
filing date. It does not confer other benefits to member nations. Inventors still must follow all the other
provisions of patent laws in other countries to protect their inventions internationally. It can be a very long and
expensive process to file multiple patent applications within 1 year. The Patent Cooperation Treaty of 1970
(PCT) attempts to streamline the application process. The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO),
which is part of the United Nations, administers the PCT.
The PCT was created to make international protection of patents easier by allowing an inventor to file for
patent protection simultaneously in several member countries. The PCT allows inventors to file one
international patent application. Inventors submit the international patent application to their national patent
office or to the WIPO in some situations. This application then has the same effect as filing for a patent in
member countries. The filing date for the international application is fixed in priority as soon as the application
is submitted.
Under the PCT process, an international patent application is subject to an international search. Examiners
review the published documents in all member countries to see if there is any information that might affect the
patentability of the invention. The search is very comprehensive.
The PCT gives other benefits as well. Under the PCT, inventors have up to 18 months after they submit their
international patent applications to decide whether they will pursue patents in other countries that are PCT
members. If they do, the patent process is shortened because other countries will rely on the results of the
international search in conducting their review of the patent application. In addition, the inventor is
guaranteed patent protection as of the date of the original international application. This is important because
many foreign countries grant patent protection only to the first inventor who files for a patent application.
The United States joined the PCT in 1978. More than 150 countries have signed the treaty. You can read
more at https://www.wipo.int/pct/en/.
Sometimes this requirement is hard to understand. Many inventions or
discoveries seem obvious once they are publicly announced or offered for sale.
People often say, “Why did I not think of that?” when they see these types of
products. Courts have recognized that an invention that seems obvious after it is
created may meet the non-obvious requirement. That is the nature of some types of
inventions. Judge Learned Hand even said, “It certainly cannot be necessary to
repeat the well-known principle that it is no indication of noninvention that the device
should seem so obvious after it is discovered.” 12
The USPTO looks at prior art and how an invention is used to determine if it is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.non-obvious. An invention is non-obvious if a person with ordinary skill in the kind of
technology used in the invention would not have discovered or invented it. The
invention also must be sufficiently different from the prior art. It is important to
remember that the USPTO reviews these elements based on the date of the
inventor’s patent application.
FIGURE 10-1 shows how the three patentability requirements work together.
FIGURE 10-1
Patentability requirements.
The Patent Application Process
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.An inventor must submit a patent application to the USPTO to patent an invention or
discovery. Patent prosecution refers to the actions the USPTO must complete in
order to grant a patent. In March 2020, it took the USPTO almost 23 months to
prosecute a patent application. 13 This is the period from submitting a patent
application to receiving a decision on it.
A patent application contains the following basic parts:
Specification—The written technical description of the invention. The
specification also contains information about how to make and use the invention.
The specification must include enough information that a person with ordinary skill
in the relevant area could make the invention based on the specification.
Drawings—The pictorial description of the invention. The drawings must
completely describe the invention or discovery. They help the USPTO understand
the invention or discovery.
Oath—The inventor must sign an oath that he or she is the first inventor of the
item described in the patent application.
Filing fees—There are different filing fees based upon the type of patent. There
are also additional fees for large patent applications, search fees, and examination
fees.
A patent application specification must include at least one claim. A “claim” defines
the part of the invention that is to be protected by the patent. A patent specification
may have several different claims.
NOTE
USPTO employees are not allowed to apply for patents of their own. See U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 4.
Once the USPTO receives a patent application, it reviews it to make sure that it
meets the patentability requirements. Patent Office examiners conduct this review.
An examiner is a USPTO employee with special skills. U.S. law requires patent
examiners to have sufficient “legal knowledge and scientific ability” to conduct this
review. 14 After review, an examiner either rejects the application or issues a patent.
NOTE
The USPTO has a strong preference for patent applications to be electronically submitted. Applications
that are submitted on paper require an additional processing fee.
An inventor must pay patent maintenance fees once the USPTO issues a patent.
This keeps the patent in force. If an inventor does not maintain a patent, then other
people can take advantage of it. Patent maintenance fees are due at 3.5, 7.5, and
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.11.5 years after the original patent issue date.
Infringement and Remedies
When an inventor receives a patent for an invention or discovery, he or she has the
exclusive right to keep others from using that invention. The inventor is the only one
who can make, sell, or use it. This protection begins when the patent is issued and
lasts for as long as the patent is valid. The federal government does not enforce
patents. Instead, inventors must enforce their own rights. They must sue people who
violate their patent rights, as well as people who make, use, or sell the patented
invention during the patent period. They also may sue a person who makes, uses, or
sells a substantially similar product.
NOTE
A patent troll is a person who owns a patent but does not intend to make, use, or sell the invention.
Instead, patent trolls enforce their patent rights and file lawsuits against alleged infringers. The term is not
complimentary. It refers to a person who is overly aggressive and opportunistic.
A person who violates the IP rights of another is called an infringer. It does not
matter if the infringer intended to violate the inventor’s patent. An inventor can hold
an infringer liable for violating a patent even if the infringer acted unwittingly. This
process, which is called strict liability, means that people can be held responsible
for their actions even if they did not intend to cause harm.
If inventors want to sue for patent infringement, they must do so in federal court
because patents are governed by federal law. Federal district courts have original
jurisdiction for patent infringement cases.
Infringers have two basic defenses to an inventor’s claim of patent infringement:
1. The patent is invalid.
2. The patent is valid, but the alleged infringer did not violate the patent.
The first defense is that the inventor’s patent is invalid for some reason. For
example, a patent is invalid if an invention was publicly announced or sold for more
than 1 year before the patent application. The infringer would argue that the patent is
not valid because the inventor violated the 1-year grace period rule. An infringer also
could argue that a patent is invalid if the inventor violated certain federal laws. It
could also be argued that a patent is not valid if the inventor misleads the USPTO
during the patent application process.
Under patent law, an issued patent is presumed to be valid. 15 This means
infringers cannot merely assert that a patent is invalid to defend themselves in a
lawsuit. Instead, they must prove that the patent is invalid for some reason. This is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.called the burden of proof. The infringer has the burden of proving that an issued
patent is invalid.
The second defense is that an alleged infringer can argue that even if an
inventor’s patent is valid, he or she did not violate it. The infringer can claim his or
her products or inventions do not infringe upon the inventor’s patent. These cases
can become very technical. Courts and jurors must review the technical
specifications of products and patents to decide whether infringement occurred.
Remedies in an infringement case include injunctive relief and damages.
Inventors want the court to issue an injunction that orders the infringer to stop
violating the inventor’s patent. This type of order means that the infringer can no
longer make, use, or sell a product that infringes on the inventor’s patent.
NOTE
In the United States, the general rule is that each party in litigation will pay its own attorney’s fees. In some
cases, courts can order the losing party to pay the winning party’s attorney’s fees. Courts usually award
attorney’s fees as a penalty for bad behavior or frivolous lawsuits.
NOTE
In some instances, treble damages can be awarded if a defendant intentionally used the plaintiff’s
trademark. 39
Inventors also are entitled to money damages in an infringement case. Damages
compensate the inventor for profits that he or she may have lost because of the
infringer’s actions. In some cases, an inventor may be entitled to treble damages if
the infringer willfully violated the inventor’s patent. 16 The inventor may also be
entitled to recover his or her attorney’s fees in some cases. 17
What Is the Difference Between Patents and Trade
Secrets?
Patents are IP rights that are granted under federal law. They grant exclusive rights
to an inventor of an item for a certain period of time. A patent owner has the right to
keep others from making or using the patented invention. He or she also has the
power to stop others from selling their invention.
A trade secret is similar. Trade secrets protect the formulas, processes,
methods, and information that give a business a competitive edge. Trade secrets
must have value to a person or business. Otherwise, there is no reason to protect it.
A trade secret is a common law concept that has been codified under federal law
and by many states. 18 To establish a trade secret, the information that is to be
protected must:
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.FYI
Trade secret law is considered a part of IP law. However, it sometimes does not receive as much attention
as patent, trademark, or copyright issues. This is because patent, trademark, and copyright protection are
based on federal registration and public disclosure. Trade secret protection is based on secrecy and
confidentiality. The study of trade secrets is sometimes minimized because the process for protecting trade
secrets is so different.
Have value—The information must have economic value. This means that it is
valuable to the business that protects it. It also means that it would be valuable to
competitors of the business. This also considers the money, time, and resources
that the business put into developing the information. The more valuable the
information, the more likely that it is a trade secret.
Be unknown—The information must not be known outside of the business. If
other companies or people know about the information, then it is not a secret. Any
public awareness of the information can end its protected status.
Be unascertainable—The information must not be easy to duplicate or even
reverse engineer. If little effort is needed to ascertain the information, then it is
unlikely to be considered a trade secret.
Be protected—The information must be protected. This means that the business
must take steps to make sure that it does not become accessible or known to the
public. To protect the information, a business should use confidentiality and
nondisclosure contracts when they share the information with others. The more a
business protects the information, the more likely it is a trade secret.
NOTE
Unlike patents, trade secrets are not registered. A person or business does not have to meet any
registration or procedural formalities to protect his or her trade secrets.
Because they are kept secret, trade secrets can be protected for an unlimited time.
To enforce their trade secrets, a person or business must take actions that protect
them and keep them secret. For example, an Alabama Court of Appeals case dealt
with the protection of trade secrets. In that case, documents that contained trade
secret information were left in an unmarked box on the back seat of a company
vehicle. The keys to the vehicle were not safeguarded. Many company employees
potentially had access to the vehicle. In determining that the company did not take
proper steps to protect its trade secrets, the Alabama Court of Appeals said, “We
aren’t convinced that leaving allegedly confidential and sensitive documents in a
cardboard box in a company vehicle for over one week . . . amounts to a reasonable
step to ensure the secrecy of the information contained therein.” 19
If a trade secret is stolen, then a person can pursue remedies allowed under the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.law against the thief. A person who violates a trade secret can be held responsible
under civil and criminal law.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Trademarks
A trademark is an IP right used to protect words, logos, and symbols that identify a
product or service. Businesses spend a lot of money developing their trademarks. A
trademark is used to distinguish between different products. A mark used to identify
services is called a servicemark.
NOTE
The USPTO says the oldest U.S. trademark still in use was registered in 1884. The design is the word
SAMSON with a picture of a man wrestling a lion. Samson Rope Technologies uses the trademark on its
products. You can see the trademark at www.samsonrope.com.
The laws for trademarks and servicemarks are the same. Trademarks and
servicemarks are collectively called trademarks in many texts, including this one.
Even the USPTO uses the term trademark to describe both types of marks.
Trademarks represent a business’s commercial identity. Some marks are well
recognized by the public. For example, the distinctive red bull’s-eye design of the
Target Corporation identifies a retail department store. The bull’s-eye design is its
registered trademark. The New York Times Company has used the trademarked
slogan “All the news that’s fit to print” since 1896. It registered the slogan in 1958.
The slogan still appears on the front page of The New York Times today.
How Should an Invention or Process Be Protected?
A person or business has to weigh many factors when considering whether to protect an invention through a
patent or as a trade secret. They include:
Whether the invention currently protected by trade secret is patentable. If it is, the person must review
whether a patent provides better IP protection.
What processes and controls can be used to make sure that only a limited number of people know
about the invention. A person must make sure that everyone knows that an invention protected as a
trade secret must be kept extremely confidential.
How long the person wishes to protect the invention and the type of protection required.
What Is the Invention?
Trade secrets can be used to protect almost everything. One of the best-known examples of a trade secret is
the Coca-Cola secret formula. The Coca-Cola Company even has an exhibit in its company museum about
how it protects its trade-secret formula. Trade secrets also can be used to protect special ways to
manufacture products or a process for conducting business.
Patents are limited to protecting only certain types of inventions or discoveries. To be patentable, an invention
or discovery must meet all patentability requirements. If an inventor fails to meet any one of the requirements,
then the USPTO can deny the patent application.
Advantage goes to: Trade secrets. Trade secrets can protect more types of inventions and discoveries.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.How Must the Invention Be Protected?
The owner of a patent has the exclusive right to use the invention or discovery that is patented. That means
that the owner can stop anyone else from using it. It is a violation of a patent to reverse engineer a product
and recreate it. Only the patent owner can make the patented product.
Under trade secret law, it is not a violation to reverse engineer a product. This means that a person can
analyze products to try to determine their secrets. For instance, chemists have tried to figure out the Coca-
Cola secret formula. So long as a person lawfully obtains the product, analyzing it to figure out its trade
secrets is legal.
Advantage goes to: Patents. Patents give greater protection against use than trade secrets.
How Long Must the Invention Be Protected?
A patent’s exclusive protection lasts only for the period of the patent. In most instances, this is 20 years.
During this time, the inventor has the sole right to make, use, or sell the product. After the patented period is
up, anyone may make the underlying product.
Trade secret protection can last forever, as long as the trade secret is kept confidential. For example, the
Coca-Cola formula has been kept secret for over 134 years. Businesses implement many different types of
policies to keep trade secrets confidential. For example, they use access-control mechanisms in computer
systems. They limit physical access based on need-to-know principles. They may even use separation-of-
duty principles to make sure that no one person knows an entire trade secret.
Advantage goes to: Trade secrets. Trade secrets can be protected longer.
If a company patents a process, invention, or method, it may lose trade secret rights in it. Patent applications
are made available to the public 18 months after they are filed. The only exception to this rule is if the
inventor states that he or she is not filing for a patent abroad. The USPTO makes patent information available
when a patent is issued. Once information is made available to the public, it no longer can be protected as a
trade secret.
Trademarks encourage brand loyalty. They also make it easy for customers to
recognize products made by a particular manufacturer. They represent goodwill.
Goodwill is the image and reputation a business has with its customers. Entities
protect their trademarks from misuse because they want to protect their business
and reputation.
Both federal and state laws govern trademarks. Federal trademark protection is
the most well-known. The federal government regulates trademark registration under
the Commerce Clause powers granted by the U.S. Constitution. Congress enacted
the first trademark law in the late 1800s. Today, the main federal law protecting
trademarks is the Lanham Act (1946). 20 The Lanham Act allows for federal
registration of trademarks. It also defines how trademarks can be protected. This
chapter discusses federal trademark protection.
NOTE
The Lanham Act also is known as the Trademark Act of 1946.
Trademark Basics
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Trademark protection rights belong to the first person who uses the trademark in
commerce. This is different from patent and copyright laws, which award rights to the
inventor or author. The first person or business to use the trademark in commerce
will have certain common law rights to use the trademark. This is true under
common law and state and federal trademark statutes. Entities that use trademarks
in U.S. interstate commerce often register them with the USPTO. Entities that use
trademarks only in one state may choose to register only in that particular state.
The rise in internet e-commerce may mean that more businesses will pursue
federal registration for their trademarks. This is because business conducted over
the internet cannot really be limited to customers of only one state. If an entity wants
to conduct business over the internet, it may want to register its trademarks with the
federal government. Over 640,000 trademark applications were filed with the
USPTO in 2019. 21
There are several benefits to federally registering a trademark. They are:
Notice of the date of first use—The filing date of the registration application
gives the public notice about the use of the trademark. It establishes a priority date
for determining who was the first person or company to use a particular trademark.
It establishes evidence of ownership of the trademark.
Right to sue in federal court—A person or entity who registers a trademark with
the USPTO has the right to sue infringers in federal court. They also have the right
to recover damages and costs associated with an infringement lawsuit. In some
cases, they may be able to recover attorney’s fees. 22
Limited ways to challenge the trademark—After 5 years of registration, a
trademark can be contested only in limited ways. There are very few exceptions to
this rule. 23
Right to use the federal registration symbol—Only a federally registered
trademark can use the federal registration symbol. 24 The symbol is an uppercase
R in an enclosed circle or ® . A person violates federal law if he or she uses this
symbol on a trademark that is not federally registered.
A person must meet two basic requirements to register a trademark with the
USPTO. They are:
Use of the trademark in interstate commerce
Distinctiveness of the trademark
Use in Commerce
First, the trademark must be used in interstate commerce. 25 A person uses a
trademark in interstate commerce when it is placed on goods or services and sold to
the public in several different states. The registration application must state when the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.trademark was first used in commerce.
NOTE
Trademarks that are not federally registered often carry the raised “TM” symbol, or ™, to show that a
person or business claims the underlying trademark as its own. Trademarks registered under state laws
may use this notation.
A person may still register the trademark even if it is not used in interstate
commerce at the time that the registration is filed. In this case, the person registering
the trademark must show good faith intent to use the trademark in commerce in the
future. “Good faith” means that a person honestly intends to use the trademark in
interstate commerce.
Under the law, the person must begin using the trademark within 6 months after
the USPTO approves it. The USPTO can extend this period up to 2.5 years. 26 A
person must notify the USPTO once it begins to use the trademark. At this point, the
USPTO will issue the trademark registration.
Distinctive
The second basic requirement is that a trademark must be distinctive. 27 Almost
anything used by a person to distinguish his or her goods and services from another
person’s goods and services can be a trademark. Words, numbers, logos, and
pictures can all serve as trademarks.
NOTE
The federal government can regulate interstate commerce only under its Commerce Clause authority. That
is why a trademark must be used in interstate commerce to be federally registered. A trademark that is
used only in one state can be registered under the state’s trademark law.
The USPTO has two methods of registering trademarks. They are the “Principal
Register” and the “Supplemental Register.” Strong trademarks, which are registered
right away on the “Principal Register,” are inherently distinctive. This is a term of art
in trademark law. Registration on the “Principal Register” is the main way of
registering trademarks. It gives a trademark owner the greatest amount of rights
under federal law.
NOTE
The trademark distinctiveness requirement is similar to the patent novelty requirement.
Weaker trademarks can be registered on the “Supplemental Register.” These
trademarks meet all of the registration requirements except that they are not
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.inherently distinctive. The only federal right granted by registering on the
“Supplemental Register” is that the trademark owner may sue in federal court for
trademark infringement. After 5 years of using the trademark, the owner may submit
proof of trademark use and evidence that it has achieved secondary meaning. The
USPTO will then move the trademark from the “Supplemental Register” to the
“Principal Register.”
Trademark Registration
An applicant must submit a trademark registration application to the USPTO to
register a trademark. In July 2020, it was taking the USPTO about 10 months to
review trademark applications. 28 The USPTO encourages trademark applications to
be filed electronically as the USPTO processes electronic applications faster than
paper applications. To encourage electronic applications, the USPTO makes paper
application forms available only by special request over the telephone.
A trademark application must contain the following:
Name and contact information for the owner of the trademark
A drawing of the trademark
A technical listing of the goods or services that the trademark represents
Filing fee
NOTE
You can learn more about the USPTO’s Trademark Electronic Application System (TEAS) at
http://www.uspto.gov/trademarks/teas/index.jsp.
After the application is filed, it is forwarded to an examiner who reviews the
application to determine whether it is complete. The examiner also reviews proof that
the trademark is used in commerce. The examiner reviews the trademark to make
sure that it is inherently distinctive. Finally, the examiner reviews other trademarks to
search for conflicts.
An examiner can reject a trademark for several reasons. 29 They include:
The proposed trademark is a generic name for goods or services.
The proposed trademark is descriptive of the applicant’s goods or services and
there is no secondary meaning.
The proposed trademark is similar to another trademark already registered, and
use of it on the applicant’s goods or services is likely to cause customer confusion.
The proposed trademark contains immoral, deceptive, or scandalous matter.
The proposed trademark may disparage or falsely suggest a connection with
persons (living or dead), institutions, beliefs, or national symbols.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.When the USPTO approves a trademark, it publishes the trademark in the Official
Gazette, the USPTO’s official publication. The Official Gazette, which is published
every week, includes a listing for trademarks and a listing for patents.
NOTE
You can see entries in the Official Gazette online at https://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/official-
gazette.
The Official Gazette gives the public notice of new trademarks. Once the
trademark is published, any party who has concerns about the trademark may
contest it. These parties have 30 days from the date of publication in the Official
Gazette to file an “opposition” to the registration. 30 An “opposition” is a proceeding
before the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board that hears trademark disputes.
If no one opposes the trademark, the USPTO issues a Certificate of Registration
for it, if it is already used in interstate commerce. If the person registering the
trademark has not used it in commerce, he or she must begin using it within 6
months after the USPTO approves it. A person must notify the USPTO once he or
she begins to use the trademark. The USPTO will then register the trademark.
Strong Versus Weak Trademarks
The USPTO “Principal Register” is for trademarks that are “inherently distinctive.” These are strong
trademarks. Traditionally, trademarks are inherently distinctive if they do more than describe a good or
service. Trademarks that are unrelated to a good or service and are fanciful, arbitrary, or suggestive are
considered strong trademarks.
The USPTO’s oldest registered trademark is a good example of a strong trademark. That trademark is the
name SAMSON with a picture of a man wrestling a lion. It has nothing to do with the company’s product,
which is rope. However, it is a strong trademark because it is inherently distinctive. Customers who see the
trademark will immediately associate it with the Samson Rope Corporation.
One of the best examples of an inherently distinctive trademark is the Apple Corporation’s rainbow-colored
apple, which is their registered trademark. The trademark is inherently distinctive because it has nothing at all
to do with the company’s product. When customers see the rainbow-colored apple with a bite taken out of it,
they immediately think of Apple computers. This trademark would not have been inherently distinctive if an
apple grower or a grocery store used it.
Weak trademarks are not inherently distinctive. The most common type of weak trademark is a descriptive
trademark. A trademark is descriptive when it describes the underlying product that it represents.
Descriptive trademarks get protection when they achieve “secondary meaning,” or when the public
associates the trademark with a particular good or service. Once a person can show that a trademark has a
secondary meaning, it is entitled to full trademark protection.
For example, the trademark Kellogg’s Raisin Bran is a descriptive trademark that describes a kind of
breakfast cereal. This registered trademark of the Kellogg Company has achieved secondary meaning as a
particular type of cereal. The trademark Carpetland, USA for a flooring store is also descriptive. This
registered trademark of the Carpetland, USA Corporation also has acquired secondary meaning as a
particular type of flooring store.
If the USPTO determines that a trademark is descriptive and it has not yet achieved secondary meaning, that
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.trademark is listed on the “Supplemental Register.” The only federal right granted by registering on the
“Supplemental Register” is that the trademark owner may sue in federal court for trademark infringement.
After 5 years of using a trademark, the owner can submit paperwork to move the trademark from the
“Supplemental Register” to the “Principal Register.”
Some types of trademarks can never be registered. For example, generic trademarks cannot be registered.
They are not eligible because they describe a class of products and are not unique. For example, the word
butter cannot be trademarked because it describes a class of dairy products.
The registration period for a trademark is 10 years for newly registered
trademarks. Between the fifth and sixth year after a person first registers a
trademark, he or she must submit an “Affidavit of Use.” 31 This document shows that
the person or business is still using the trademark. After that, the Affidavit of Use
must be filed again right before the end of the 10-year registration period. The
person or business also must pay a maintenance fee. A person or business must re-
register the trademark every 10 years to maintain protection of the mark. 32
NOTE
An affidavit is a written statement a person signs, swearing that the content in the affidavit is true. The
person signs the affidavit in front of a notary public or other official allowed by law to administer oaths and
witness signatures.
Infringement and Remedies
Trademark infringement is a violation of a person’s trademark rights. A trademark
owner has the right to use the trademark in commerce in association with certain
goods and services. This protection begins as soon as the owner starts using the
trademark in commerce. If a trademark is registered under either federal or state law,
then the owner of the trademark has certain other rights as well. Federal and state
governments do not enforce trademarks. Instead, owners must enforce their own
rights and sue people who violate their trademarks.
FYI
Although this section discusses federal law, you should remember that many of these same types of
trademark infringement actions also could be pursued in state court. Trademark owners may have
additional types of tort actions that they can pursue in state court.
There are two main types of trademark infringement cases:
Use of a similar trademark that is confusing or deceptive to the customer 33
Use of a similar trademark that dilutes the value of a famous trademark 34
In the first type of case, a trademark owner can sue another person who uses a
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.similar trademark in a way that is “likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or
to deceive.” 35 The owner can bring this infringement action for innocent infringement
and for willful infringement. The plaintiff, who is the trademark owner, has the burden
of proof. The plaintiff must prove the following elements:
The plaintiff owns a valid trademark.
The defendant used a similar trademark in commerce.
The defendant’s use of a similar trademark is likely to confuse consumers.
NOTE
Examples of famous trademarks include the Apple Computer, Coca-Cola, and Kleenex trademarks. They
are all registered and used extensively across the United States. Most people recognize these trademarks
and the associated brand of products.
If a trademark owner has registered his or her trademark with the USPTO, that
registration is proof of ownership of the trademark. A plaintiff can use the defendant’s
own advertising materials to show that the defendant used the trademark in
commerce. A plaintiff also can use these materials to show that the defendant’s use
of the trademark was confusing in some way. The confusion created could exploit
the plaintiff’s goodwill in his or her trademarks and products. That is, the defendant is
using a similar trademark in the hopes of selling more products because of the
plaintiff’s good commercial reputation.
In reviewing whether a trademark is confusing, courts will compare the plaintiff’s
and defendants’ trademarks. They will look at how similar the marks are. They will
also look at the similarities between the goods and services that each trademark
represents. They might also look at the defendant’s intent in using a similar
trademark. If the court finds the defendant’s use of the trademark confusing, it can
order the defendant to stop using the trademark.
The second type of trademark infringement case is for trademark dilution. This
type of infringement case specifically applies to “famous” trademarks, or ones that
are very well-known. Only holders of famous trademarks can file a lawsuit for
trademark dilution.
In a dilution case, the trademark owner can sue for any use of a similar
trademark that dilutes or tarnishes his or her trademark. Dilution occurs when a
trademark is used to promote different goods. An example would be a Coca-Cola
minivan or a Kleenex motorcycle. Customers would not be confused by the different
use of the famous trademark. However, the value of the famous trademark is diluted
when it is used with dissimilar products.
The trademark owner also has a dilution case if the use of a similar trademark
tarnishes a famous trademark. A trademark is tarnished when it is used in an
unflattering light. For example, in 1996 the children’s toy store, Toys “R” Us, sued an
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.adult website with the domain name “adultsrus.” The court held that the defendant’s
use of “adultsrus” to sell adult products diluted the “family” image and goodwill that
Toys “R” Us had built in its products. The court ordered the defendants to stop using
the “adultsrus” name. 36
Remedies in an infringement case include injunctive relief and damages.
Trademark owners want the court to stop infringers from using their trademarks in a
confusing or diluting way. 37 Trademark owners also may be able to get damages for
the defendant’s profits in using the trademark, their own damages, and costs of the
litigation. 38
Relationship of Trademarks on Domain Names
The rise of e-commerce has created some interesting questions about trademark
use. Today, people take it almost as a given that www.coca-cola.com will take you to
the Coca-Cola Company’s website. Their domain name serves as their internet
business address. Many companies try to use their business name or trademark as
their domain name.
NOTE
At the end of 2019, there were over 362 million top-level domain name registrations. 40
A domain name includes a top-level domain, represented by the .com, .net, or
.gov at the end of the domain name. The second level is the information that comes
directly to the left of .com, .net, or .gov. This is usually the place where a business or
entity might want to use its name or trademark. To do this, the entity must register its
domain name.
A domain name is different from a uniform resource locator (URL). The domain
name is only part of a URL. The complete URL is the actual internet address. A URL
goes into much more detail than a domain name, providing much more information,
including the specific page address, folder name, machine name, and protocol
language, such as http://.
Companies register their domain names and create websites to advertise and
sell their products. They want their domain name to be recognizable to their
customers. The first company to register a domain name has the right to use that
name. Domain name registrars do not review a domain name to make sure that it
does not infringe on a trademark. If a domain name is available for use, then they
will accept registration for that name.
In the mid to late 1990s, domain names were registered at a fast pace, and not
all of these registrations were legitimate. Cybersquatting is the bad-faith registration
of a domain name that is a registered trademark or trade name of another entity. A
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.trade name is the business name of an organization. Cybersquatters tried to register
these names before the legitimate owners of the trademark or trade name. They also
registered domain names based on these famous trademarks or trade names but
used a common misspelling of those names.
Registering a Domain Name
A domain name is the common name after www that people use to refer to their websites. People register
these names to grow their businesses and help others find their businesses on the internet. Domain names
are simply internet addresses.
Domain names must be registered with the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN),
which coordinates the internet’s naming system. You cannot directly register a domain name with ICANN.
Instead, you must register it with a domain name registrar. ICANN authorizes these registrars to accept
domain name registrations and creates policies for how these registrations should be handled.
ICANN and domain name registrars do not review whether a new domain name registration infringes upon a
business or entity’s trademark. Instead, they accept registrations for domain names on a first-come, first-
served basis. Trademark laws and ICANN’s Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy (UDRP) are
used to resolve domain name disputes regarding trademarks. You can view ICANN’s dispute resolution
materials at https://www.icann.org/resources/pages/help/dndr/udrp-en.
A cybersquatter registers trademarks or trade names to profit off of the other
person’s trademark or trade name. They also register them in the hopes of selling
the domain name to the trademark owner for large amounts of money, or to attract
customers who were looking for a specific product or business. The cybersquatter
then redirects the customer to other websites.
NOTE
Bad faith means a malicious or harmful motive for taking a certain action.
Trademark owners have a legal right to protect their trademark, which includes
protecting their trademarks from cybersquatters. Many people, businesses, and
organizations were harmed by cybersquatters because they had to pay large
amounts of money to get ownership of their trademarks. They sued cybersquatters
to stop them from engaging in trademark infringement, which was a time-consuming
and expensive process.
NOTE
The WIPO is an arbitrator under the UDRP. The WIPO reported a record number of domain name cases in
2019. 42
Congress created the Anti-Cybersquatting Consumer Protection Act (ACPA) in
1999. 41 It was designed to stop people from registering domain names that were the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.trademarks of other entities and allows entities to sue others for cybersquatting. To
prove their case, the plaintiff must show that the cybersquatter registered the
trademark in bad faith with the intent to profit from the registration. Under the law, a
plaintiff can recover damages and ask the court to issue an injunction that stops the
cybersquatter from using the contested domain name. Courts also can award the
contested domain name to the winning party.
Trademark owners also can pursue a domain name dispute under the ICANN
UDRP. This process may be faster than pursuing an action under the ACPA. Under
the UDRP, a contested domain name may be disconnected or transferred to a
winning plaintiff.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Copyright
A copyright is an IP right. The U.S. Constitution establishes federal copyright
protection. The first federal copyright law was established in 1790, and the most
recent version of federal copyright law was the 1976 Copyright Act. 43 Copyright is
protected under federal law; states are preempted from creating their own copyright
laws.
NOTE
Federal law governs patent and copyright issues. State laws are preempted. This is because the
Constitution granted the federal government the specific power to make laws to protect authors and
inventors.
The holder of a copyright has the exclusive right to do anything with the
copyrighted work. The holder is the only one who can reproduce, perform, or sell the
work. Copyright holders also have the power to keep others from using their
copyrighted material.
Almost anything can be copyrighted. You need to remember that most materials
posted to the internet are protected by copyright. In addition, most informational and
advertising materials posted on websites by businesses and organizations are
subject to copyright. Blog posts and personal websites also are protected. When
reposting information that you find on the internet, you need to make sure that you
do not violate the owner’s copyright.
Sometimes copyrighted materials are marked with an uppercase “C” in an
enclosed circle or ©. The law does not require this. Even if the material is not
marked, it may be copyrighted.
Copyright Basics
A copyright is used to protect almost any creative endeavor (called a “work”), such
as books, art, music, videos, computer programs, and any other creative work.
Works that can be copyrighted include:
Literary works—This includes novels, newspapers, textbooks, and computer
software.
Musical works—This includes songs, scores for musicals, and jingles.
Dramatic works—This includes plays, skits, monologues, and any music that
might be included in the dramatic work.
Pantomimes and choreographic works—This includes ballets or other
expressions of dance. It also includes mime shows.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works—This includes photographs,
sculptures, fine art, and cartoons.
Motion picture and audiovisual works—This includes movies and television
shows.
Sound recordings—This includes recordings of music, sound, and words.
Architectural works—This includes building designs, blueprints, and drawings.
NOTE
Copyright protection is not available for names. You can read more about it at
https://www.copyright.gov/circs/circ33.pdf.
The categories are very broad. A work of authorship might be properly copyrighted in
several different categories. For example, the advertising and information material
that an organization posts on its website can be copyrighted as a literary work.
Pictures on the website can be copyrighted as a pictorial or graphic work.
Federal law grants copyright protection to “an original work of authorship fixed in
any tangible medium of expression.” 44 To be eligible for copyright protection, a work
must be both original and in a fixed form.
A work is original if it is not copied from another source. If a work is not original, it
is not eligible for copyright. Works that are created completely from publicly known
facts, with no other original material, are not copyrightable.
Unlike an invention or discovery that is patentable, copyrighted works do not
have to be new or novel. They also do not have to be good or aesthetically pleasing.
They simply have to be an author’s original expression of an idea.
Copyright protection does not extend to mere ideas on their own. Instead, these
ideas must be written down or put in a fixed format. This is why books are entitled to
copyright protection, but ideas that are simply in the head of the author are not.
Copyright also is not available for useful articles. Patents, however, may protect
these types of articles, which can include clothing, furniture, machinery, and other
items.
Works that are in the public domain also are not copyrightable. The public
domain refers to the body of works that are free for public use. This includes works
where the copyright has expired, as well as works of the U.S. government such as
the United States Code. It is important for you to remember that information that is
available on the internet is not necessarily in the public domain.
Copyright protection arises as soon as an original work is created in a fixed form.
An author does not have to do anything to gain this protection. Instead, it arises as a
matter of law. An author is not required to register a work to get copyright protection.
Writers do not have to mark their work to get copyright protection.
The owner of a copyright has the exclusive right to do anything with the
copyrighted work. Subject to only a few exceptions, only the copyright owner can
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.reproduce, perform, or sell the work. 45 Copyright owners also have the power to
allow others to use their copyrighted material by using a special kind of contract
called a license. The law gives copyright holders the following broad rights:
NOTE
A derivative work is a work derived from an original work. For example, a movie based on a best-selling
novel is a derivative work.
To reproduce the copyrighted work
To prepare derivative works based upon the copyrighted work
To distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to the public
To publicly perform the copyrighted work
To publicly display the copyrighted work
NOTE
A WFH situation is created via a contract.
Copyright owners also have the power to keep others from using their copyrighted
material. It is important to understand who the owner of a copyright is. Often the
owner of a copyright is the person who created the original work. This is not always
the case, however. For example, when an employee creates work for his or her
employer, the employer typically is the owner of the copyright. Copyright law calls
this situation a “work made for hire” (WFH).
Other than in the employer/employee context, a WFH must be reflected in a
written document. This document shows that a person has specifically
commissioned a WFH. The document also reflects that the author agrees to work on
a WFH and that copyright belongs to the person who commissioned the work. The
following items are common works for hire: 46
A contribution to a collective work
A part of a motion picture or other audiovisual work
A translation
A supplementary work
A compilation
An instructional text
A test and answer material for a test
An atlas
The length of copyright protection is determined through ownership. For original
works created after January 1, 1978, a copyright lasts for the length of the author’s
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.life plus 70 years after the author’s death. If two or more authors prepare a work, the
70-year period does not begin to run out until after the last author’s death. For WFH,
a copyright lasts for 95 years from the publication of the work. In limited cases
protection also could extend for 120 years from the creation of the work. Whichever
period is shorter is the proper term. 47
Copyright Registration
Copyright protection arises automatically as soon as an original work of authorship is
fixed. An author is not required to register a work to get protection. However, there
are many reasons why an author may choose to register for copyright protection.
The main reason for a person to register a copyright is so that the copyright can be
enforced. An author who created a work in the United States may not file a lawsuit
for copyright infringement without first registering the copyright with the U.S.
Copyright Office. 48
The law creates several other reasons to register a copyright. Registration
creates a public record of the copyright. In addition, if a copyright is registered within
5 years of publication, it creates a presumption of valid ownership. 49 This means a
copyright is presumed to be valid, and the person challenging it must present proof
that it is invalid.
NOTE
The U.S. Copyright Office is a unit of the Library of Congress.
An author must submit copyright registration to the U.S. Copyright Office, which
accepts both paper and electronic registration applications. It reports that it takes on
average 3 months to process electronic applications, whereas it takes 6 months on
average to process paper-based applications. 50
NOTE
The U.S. Copyright Office has prepared many documents to help people better understand copyright. You
can see a list of those documents at https://www.copyright.gov/circs/.
A person registers a work by submitting an application and a copy of the work.
The applicant also must pay a fee. The only way to register a copyright is with the
U.S. Copyright Office. Some people believe that mailing a copy of their work to
themselves via U.S. mail is copyright registration or proof of ownership in the work.
This is sometimes called a poor man’s copyright. However, this is not a valid way to
register a copyright. To repeat: The only way to register a copyright in the United
States is with the U.S. Copyright Office. 51
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.How Do You Protect Copyrights Internationally?
The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (1886), administered by the WIPO, is
the main treaty regarding international copyright protection. The Berne Convention also states that any party
to the convention agrees to protect the copyrighted works of foreign citizens at least as much as it protects
the copyrighted works of its own citizens.
More than 175 countries are members of the Berne Convention. 52 The United States became a member of
the Berne Convention in 1989. It took a long time for the United States to join the Berne Convention because
the convention requires member countries to provide a minimum level of copyright protection, and the United
States had to rewrite its copyright laws to give these protections. The Berne Convention requires each
member nation to recognize the following:
A minimum term of copyright protection that is the life of the author plus 50 years
Freedom from formalities such as notice or registration to recognize a copyright. Copyright protection
arises automatically.
Protection for certain moral rights of the author.
Infringement and Remedies
Copyright holders have exclusive rights in the work that they create. These rights
arise when the work is created and continue for the length of the copyright. The
federal government does not enforce copyrights. Authors must enforce their own
rights and can sue people who infringe on their copyright. Liability for infringement is
based upon strict liability. A copyright owner can hold an infringer liable for violating a
copyright even if the infringement was not intentional.
To pursue an action for copyright infringement, a plaintiff must prove ownership of
the copyright. The plaintiff also must show that the defendant has infringed on that
copyright. A plaintiff usually proves ownership of a copyright by showing a copyright
registration as proof of the validity of the copyright.
NOTE
Piracy refers to unauthorized copying and distribution of electronic, musical, and audiovisual works.
Copyright infringement cases are very rarely simple cases of a defendant directly
copying a plaintiff’s work. To show that there has been an unauthorized reproduction,
the plaintiff must show that the defendant had access to the copyrighted work.
However, access to the copyrighted work alone is not enough to prove infringement.
The plaintiff also must show that the plaintiff’s and defendant’s works are
substantially similar.
One of the most common tests used to determine substantial similarity is
“whether a lay observer would consider the works as a whole substantially similar to
one another.” 53 This is a fact-intensive inquiry. The court will look at all the ways in
which the two works are similar. If the two works are substantially similar, then
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.copyright infringement has occurred.
Remedies for copyright infringement are similar to remedies for infringements of
other IP rights. A court can issue an injunction, which stops the infringer from
violating the copyright holder’s rights. A court also can order a defendant to pay
damages for violating a plaintiff’s copyright. A defendant also may be liable for
statutory damages under copyright law. These damages are higher for willful
copyright infringement. 54
NOTE
Statutory damages are damage amounts that the law specifies. Lawmakers specify statutory damages in
cases where it might be hard for a party to prove the amount of actual damages.
The most common way for a defendant to defend against a copyright
infringement case is to argue that the plaintiff’s work is not original. A defendant also
can present facts that the works are not substantially similar. Another defense in a
copyright infringement case is that the use of the copyrighted work is allowed under
the fair use doctrine.
FYI
Posting a URL to another person’s copyrighted materials on your own webpage is generally not
considered copyright infringement. However, posting a copy of someone’s content on your own webpage,
even if you acknowledge their work, may be copyright infringement. This is because only the owner of the
copyright has the right to reproduce and distribute his or her copyrighted materials.
Fair Use
A copyright holder has a large number of rights in his or her original work. The scope
of these rights is to encourage artistic expression. However, there are some
limitations on a copyright holder’s exclusive rights. These limitations are a defense to
copyright infringement. Fair use is one of the most common limitations.
The law states that fair use of a copyrighted work is not copyright infringement. 55
The law lists several examples of fair use. Fair use is permitted in these situations to
promote free speech. The examples include uses for:
NOTE
The U.S. Copyright Office Fair Use Index is a searchable database of court opinions about fair use. You
can learn more and access the index at https://www.copyright.gov/fair-use/.
Criticism
Comment
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.News reporting
Teaching (including multiple copies for classroom use)
Scholarship
Research
If portions of a copyrighted work are used for these purposes, then a defendant
might have a defense against an owner’s claim of copyright infringement.
The law also lists several technology-neutral factors that should be considered in
determining whether a use should be considered fair use. They can be used to
analyze the use of any type of creative work. The factors are: 56
The purpose and character of the use—A use for nonprofit, educational, or
comment purposes tends to favor fair use. A use that is for commercial or profit
purposes tends to weigh against fair use.
The nature of the copyrighted work—The more creative a work is, the more
protection it will be afforded. Fair use tends to favor the use of facts and not the
creative expression of an idea.
The amount and substantiality of the work used—Use of a small amount of a
copyrighted work tends to favor fair use. However, the use of a small part of a
work that encompasses the substantial idea in that work weighs against fair use.
The effect of the use upon the potential market—A use that has no effect on a
potential market for a work tends to weigh in favor of fair use. A use of a work that
has a major effect on the market is less likely to be considered fair use.
Courts weigh these factors against one another to determine whether the use of a
copyrighted work is fair use. If fair use is indicated, it may be a defense to a
copyright infringement claim. Fair use cases are very difficult to decide. Courts must
engage in a very detailed analysis to determine fair use.
In 2009, the Second Circuit Court of Appeals reviewed a fair use case. 57 In that
case, a book publisher created an illustrated biography about the history of the
Grateful Dead rock band. As part of the book, it included pictures of concert posters.
The plaintiff owned the copyrights to the posters and sued the book publisher for
copyright infringement.
The defendant argued that its use of the posters was allowed under the fair use
doctrine. In reviewing the case, the Second Circuit held that the use of the
copyrighted posters was fair use. It said that the use did not exploit the copyrighted
works, but was instead transformative. This means that the purpose and character of
the use were different from the original use of the copyrighted works. The posters
were greatly reduced in size and used to commemorate events in the band’s history
in a biographical fashion. As such, the use was different from the original use of the
posters and could properly be considered fair use.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Fair Use for Educational Purposes
Some people believe that the use of any copyrighted work by an educator is always fair use. However, this is
not true. The educator must still review the fair use factors.
For example, an education professor shares one short excerpt from a copyrighted academic journal article
about teaching styles with students to illustrate a lesson. This activity is probably fair use. Analysis of the fair
use factors shows:
Use in an educational setting tends to favor fair use.
The use of a scholarly journal article that contains facts tends to favor fair use.
The use of a small amount of a copyrighted work tends to favor fair use.
The use likely does not affect a potential market because it is being used in a restricted classroom
setting.
The same education professor prepares a newsletter for a website. The professor includes a copyrighted
cartoon about teaching students in the newsletter to illustrate a humorous point. This activity probably is not
fair use. The cartoon’s creator must give permission for the cartoon to be included in the newsletter. Analysis
of the fair use factors shows:
Use on a website for entertainment purposes tends to weigh against fair use.
The use of creative works tends to weigh against fair use. A cartoon is a very creative work.
The use of an entire work, such as a cartoon, tends to weigh against fair use.
Use of the work could have a major effect on the cartoonist’s ability to market his or her products,
especially because it is made available through the internet. This weighs against fair use.
The rules for determining fair use can be very detailed. The U.S. Copyright Office has prepared fair use
guidance for educators. You can read it at http://www.copyright.gov/circs/circ21.pdf.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Protecting Copyrights Online—The Digital
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA)
In 1998, Congress passed the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). 58 Congress
created the DMCA to help protect copyrights in the digital world. It also contains
provisions that help insulate internet service providers (ISPs) from the actions of
their customers.
DMCA Basics
The DMCA has five titles. They are:
Title I—This title implements two WIPO treaties. It contains provisions about
technological measures used to protect electronic copyrighted works.
Title II—This title is called the Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation
Act. It limits the liability of online service providers for copyright infringement by
users.
Title III—This title is called the Computer Maintenance Competition Assurance
Act. It allows computer technicians to make a copy of a computer program for
maintenance or repair.
Title IV—This title contains miscellaneous provisions.
Title V—This title is called the Vessel Hull Design Protection Act. It creates a new
form of IP protection for the design of vessel hulls.
Titles I, II, and III are discussed in this section.
Technology Protection Measures
Title I of the DMCA implements two WIPO treaties: the WIPO Copyright Treaty and
the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty. The DMCA amended the
Copyright Act (1976) to extend U.S. copyright law to creative works made by citizens
in other countries. These changes were required as part of the WIPO treaties.
NOTE
Many college students are aware of the DMCA because of its Title II copyright infringement provisions.
The WIPO treaties required two major changes. The first is that members of the
treaties must prevent people from bypassing technological measures used to protect
copyrighted works. Many digital products, such as DVDs, video games, electronic
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.books, and websites, use access controls to protect certain types of content. For
example, a website might password protect some sections so that only registered
members can get to those sections.
The technology measures and tools that some businesses use to protect their
content are referred to as digital rights management (DRM). Many large businesses
in the entertainment industry use DRM to protect their digital works.
The DMCA forbids people from accessing protected copyrighted content by
bypassing these access controls. They may not tamper with content protected by
technological access controls. This provision intends to protect content that is
transmitted electronically from copyright infringement. In addition, a person is not
allowed to make or sell devices that would allow other people unauthorized access
to a copyrighted work that is protected by these types of access controls. 59
Second, the DMCA also forbids the sale of devices that would allow other people
to bypass technological controls to copy a copyrighted work. However, the DMCA
does not prohibit people from actually bypassing technological controls on their own
to copy a work. This is because copying might be necessary to use parts of a work
under the fair use doctrine.
There are some exceptions to these anti-circumvention measures. 60 It may be
possible for a person to bypass technological controls that prevent unauthorized
access in these instances. Each of these exemptions has additional detailed terms
that are described only briefly here. The exemptions include the following:
NOTE
The provisions forbidding bypassing technological measures are called the “Circumvention of
Technological Protection Measures.” You also may hear these referred to as the DMCA anti-circumvention
measures.
Nonprofit libraries, archives, and educational institutions may bypass technology
protection measures to make a good faith determination that they wish to obtain
authorized access to the work.
A person who has lawfully obtained a computer program may bypass technology
protection measures to identify and analyze elements of the program in order to
make sure it is compatible with other programs.
A person may bypass technology protection measures and create tools to do so to
research and identify weaknesses in encryption technologies.
A person may bypass technology protection measures to protect children from
certain material on the internet.
A person may bypass technology protection measures when those measures are
capable of collecting or sharing personally identifying information about a person’s
online activities.
A person may bypass technology protection measures and create tools to do so
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.for testing the security of a computer system or network. The owner of the system
must specifically authorize the testing.
Title I criminalizes the act of bypassing technological measures. A person who
willfully violates the technology protection measures for profit can be held criminally
liable. Penalties include both prison time (up to 10 years is possible) and monetary
fines (up to $1,000,000 is possible). The law makes nonprofit libraries, archives, and
educational institutions entirely exempt from its criminal liability provisions. 61
FYI
Title I also allows the Library of Congress to issue administrative exemptions. These exemptions are
allowed when technology protection measures substantially limit the ability of people to make non-
infringing uses of copyrighted materials. The Library of Congress must issue administrative exemptions
every 3 years. You can read the administrative exemption rules at http://www.copyright.gov/1201/.
Online Copyright Infringement
Title II of the DMCA is called the Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation
Act. It limits the liability of an online service provider (OSP) for its customers’
copyright infringement. 62 Online service providers lobbied hard for these provisions.
They were concerned that they could be held liable for their users’ actions under
some secondary liability legal theories. In these theories, an OSP could be held
liable for a user’s actions if the OSP knew about them and contributed to them. This
was worrisome to service providers whose entire function was to provide services to
customers.
DMCA exempts OSPs from copyright infringement claims that result from the
conduct of their customers if certain criteria are met. If they meet these criteria, they
fall into a safe harbor. If an OSP qualifies for a safe harbor exemption, only the
individual infringing customer is liable for monetary damages. The OSP’s service or
network, through which the customer engaged in the copyright infringement, is not
liable. The DMCA provides safe harbors for common OSP activities. 64 They are:
NOTE
An OSP, as defined by the DMCA, 63 is a provider of online services or network access. An ISP is also an
OSP.
Transitory communications (providing network communications services)
System caching
Storage of information on systems or networks at the direction of users (hosting)
Providing information location tools (search engines)
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.The safe harbors do not require an OSP to monitor the content posted or transmitted
by the OSP’s users for copyright infringement. To take advantage of any of the safe
harbor provisions, the OSP must develop a policy of terminating the accounts of
repeat copyright offenders. OSPs also must not interfere with any technological
measures that copyright owners use to protect their copyrights. OSPs must also
meet additional criteria for three of the safe harbors.
Under the transitory communications safe harbor section, an OSP is not liable for
copyright infringement by its customers simply because the OSP provides digital
transmissions, routing, or connections for the communicating content. 65 To use this
safe harbor, an OSP must show the following:
Someone other than the OSP initiated the transmission of content.
The transmission was carried out through an automated process.
The OSP does not select who receives the transmitted material except as an
automatic response to the request of another person.
No copy of the transmission is retained in a manner that makes it available to
other recipients.
OSPs transmit the material through its system without modification of its content.
NOTE
The transitory communications safe harbor is commonly called the conduit defense. This is because the
OSP is merely providing a conduit for its users to communicate through. ISPs often rely on this safe
harbor.
This provision protects the OSP from user-initiated communications that the OSP
automatically processes. In these situations where an OSP is merely transmitting
material, it will not be liable for the alleged copyright infringement of system users.
DMCA Takedown Notices
Under the DMCA, if a copyright owner wishes to have allegedly infringing material removed from an OSP’s
network, the copyright owner must send a notice and takedown letter to the OSP’s specified agent. DMCA
requires each OSP to specify an agent who will receive these notices and respond to them.
The U.S. Copyright Office maintains a list of DMCA agents. You can find this list at
https://www.copyright.gov/dmca-directory/.
A DMCA “notice and takedown” letter must be in writing and contain the following elements: 66
A physical or electronic signature of the copyright owner or representative
Identification of the copyrighted work
Identification of the infringing material that is to be removed, along with sufficient information to enable
the ISP to locate it
Contact information for the complaining party
A statement that the complaining party has a good faith belief that the use of the copyrighted work is not
authorized by the copyright owner or the law
A statement that the information is accurate and that, under penalty of perjury, the complaining party is
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.authorized to act for the copyright owner
After receipt of a valid notice, the OSP must notify the user and remove or disable access to the allegedly
infringing material. If a user believes that the takedown is in error, the DMCA gives users an opportunity to
require that the OSP reinstate the materials.
Under the information storage and information location tools safe harbor
provisions, an OSP also must show that users control what material they post online.
OSPs also must show that they do not have actual knowledge of users’ infringing
activities. OSPs must show that they do not profit from the user’s infringing activities.
OSPs further must show that they take down or block access to infringing material
when they receive proper notice from a copyright owner.
Computer Maintenance
Title III of the DMCA is called the Computer Maintenance Competition Assurance
Act. It allows computer repair technicians to make temporary, limited copies of
computer software while they are repairing a computer. The computer must already
have a copy of the software program on it. These new copies cannot be used in any
manner and technicians must delete them when the repair job is over. The DMCA
allows a technician to make these copies to assist in repairing the computer. 67
DMCA Unintended Consequences
It has been over 20 years since the DMCA was enacted. Nonetheless, it still raises
some concerns about unintended consequences. Most of the concerns are about the
provisions of DMCA Title I and Title II. They include:
Fears that Title 1 provisions will suppress legitimate activities such as research.
Fears that the Title II provisions overburden OSPs.
Title 1 Concerns
There are many concerns about the anti-circumvention technology protection
measures specified in Title I. Many scientists, educators, and industry groups are
concerned that these provisions will stifle research. This is because of the criminal
penalties that are attached to violating these provisions. There is already some
indication that this concern is not unreasonable.
In 2001, the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) arrested a security
researcher from Russia for publishing software that bypassed access controls on e-
books. This was allegedly a violation of DMCA’s technology protection measures.
The researcher was arrested after making a presentation about the security issues
at the Def Con conference in Las Vegas. Both the researcher and the Russian
company that he worked for were charged under the DMCA. The charges against
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.the researcher were dropped. In 2002, a jury acquitted the Russian company of
charges that it violated the DMCA.
Other complaints about these provisions center on the fact that the anti-
circumvention provisions hinder fair use and, therefore, free speech. These
complaints ask about what happens when DRM-protected materials enter the public
domain. How can they be properly used in the public domain if there are no available
tools to remove DRM protection?
NOTE
To acquit means to find a person not guilty of the crimes with which he or she was charged.
Title II Concerns
There are also concerns with Title II of the DMCA. Many people argue that it places
too much of a burden on OSPs in responding to “notice and takedown” letters from
copyright holders. Because the OSP must act on the notice to maintain its safe
harbor protection, it might take down material inappropriately. Taking down material
in such a broad manner could hamper free speech. Since the enactment of the
DMCA, Google has received almost 5 billion requests to delete URLs that point to
infringing content. 68
NOTE
You can read Google’s Transparency Report, https://transparencyreport.google.com, to learn more about
the number of copyright claims that it receives.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.Case Studies and Examples
The following case studies show how the concepts discussed in this chapter are
used. These case studies are real-world examples of how IP laws are applied.
Trade Secrets
In 2008, the U.S. government charged a design engineer with stealing trade secrets
from Intel about its newest microprocessor. The value of the trade secrets was
estimated at $1 billion.
The engineer worked at Intel in Massachusetts. He resigned from his job at the
end of May 2008 and told Intel that he would use his accrued vacation time for 2
weeks until his final day at work. His employment with Intel would officially end on
June 11, 2008. The engineer did not tell Intel that he had a new job with an Intel
competitor, which he started on June 2, 2008.
Intel heard rumors that the engineer had accepted employment with its
competitor. The company began to review logs to see his network activities during
his last 2 weeks with the company. It notified law enforcement once it discovered
that the employee had accessed sensitive company documents.
NOTE
You can read the Department of Justice press release about the case at
https://archives.fbi.gov/archives/boston/press-releases/2012/former-intel-employee-sentenced-to-prison-
for-stealing-valuable-computer-chip-manufacturing-and-design-documents.
The U.S. FBI investigated the incident. Their investigation showed that the
engineer remotely accessed the Intel system several times between June 8 and
June 11, 2008. He downloaded highly sensitive Intel documents that contained data
relating to the design of the new chip. However, the FBI found no evidence that he
had disclosed or used the information that he downloaded from Intel.
In April 2012, the engineer pleaded guilty to charges of wire fraud for illegally
accessing the Intel system and downloading documents. He was sentenced to 3
years in prison. The case highlights that even large companies must implement
access control measures to protect their secrets.
Service Provider Liability for Copyright Infringement
Napster was an online music file-sharing software program. For a brief period in
time, it was the most popular peer-to-peer program in use. Napster freely distributed
its software, which allowed computer users to share their music collections online
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.with other computer users.
In 1999, several music companies filed a lawsuit against Napster for copyright
infringement under the DMCA. They argued that Napster users were directly
infringing on their copyrights and that Napster was responsible for copyright
infringement on several secondary liability theories. They argued that Napster
engaged in copyright infringement as well because it provided the services used by
its customers to engage in copyright infringement. The case, A&M Records, Inc. v.
Napster, was filed in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California.
Napster offered several defenses. It claimed that its activities fell within DMCA
safe harbor provisions. These defenses were not successful after the district court
determined that Napster failed to meet all the safe harbor requirements.
NOTE
The documentary Downloaded is about the quick rise and fall of Napster. How streaming services offer
music today is influenced by the Napster story.
The district court held that at least some of Napster’s users were engaging in
activities that infringed upon the copyrights of others and that Napster knew about
this activity. It also found that Napster provided services that its users used to
engage in copyright infringement, as well as the fact that Napster profited financially
from its users’ activities. Napster lost the case in district court.
Napster appealed to the Ninth Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals, which upheld the
district court’s decision. 69 The court ordered Napster to monitor the activities of its
network and to block access to infringing material when notified by copyright owners.
Napster shut down its service in July 2001 and declared bankruptcy in 2002. In
2003, it sold all of its assets. The Napster case is one of the most famous cases
about service provider liability for copyright infringement under the DMCA.
Digital Collections
In 2008, several U.S. college and university research libraries formed the HathiTrust.
The HathiTrust digitizes and stores the printed collections of its partner libraries to
preserve them. Several different organizations, such as Google and Microsoft, are
partners in digitizing the collections. Since its creation, the HathiTrust has digitized
over 17 million books and 6 billion pages. 70 You can see a list of participating
institutions at http://www.hathitrust.org/community.
The HathiTrust also provides access to this digitized content when a copyright
holder has allowed it. It also provides access to digital resources where allowed by
law, as in providing materials to individuals with visual disabilities, as well as access
to works in the public domain.
In September 2011, the Authors Guild sued the HathiTrust. The Authors Guild,
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.which helps writers learn about copyright and how to protect it, alleged that the
HathiTrust was violating the copyright of guild members by creating a digital archive
of copyrighted materials. They argued that the HathiTrust and its partners copied
and provided access to the materials without the owners’ consent. The HathiTrust
argued that the digitization of the materials was allowed under several different
copyright law exceptions. It argued that its activities were fair use and fell under the
preservation provision. In October 2012, a federal district court agreed with the
HathiTrust and stated that the HathiTrust’s activities did not violate copyright laws.
In November 2012, the Authors Guild appealed the case to the Second Circuit
Court of Appeals, which heard oral arguments on October 30, 2013. In June 2014,
the Second Circuit ruled in favor of HathiTrust. 71 It held the doctrine of fair use
allowed HathiTrust to create a full-text searchable database of copyrighted works. It
also held that HathiTrust could provide those copyrighted works in formats
accessible to those with disabilities
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.CHAPTER SUMMARY
IP protection is broad. It protects a person’s ownership rights in their creative
ideas and gives them the right to protect their ideas and profit from them.
These rights are exclusive to the owners of IP, who can take action against
people who violate their IP rights.
IP protection is particularly important to think about as more content
becomes available on the internet. IP law protects ideas once they are in a
physical form. When materials are published on the web, they are in a
physical form. Traditional legal concepts about IP ownership are used to
protect materials published on the internet.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.KEY CONCEPTS AND TERMS
Affidavit
Copyright
Design patents
Fair use
Intellectual property (IP)
Internet of Things
Patent
Patent prosecution
Plant patents
Prior art
Public domain
Servicemark
Strict liability
Trade secret
Trademark
Utility patents
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.CHAPTER 10 ASSESSMENT
1. What intellectual property methods can be used to protect computer software?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Patents
Trademarks
Copyrights
Patents and trademarks
Patents and copyrights
2. What is strict liability?
3. A design patent can be used to protect computer software.
A. True
B. False
4. A utility patent has a ________year term.
5. Which type of IP protection is mentioned in the U.S. Constitution?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Patents
Trademarks
Copyrights
Patents and trademarks
Patents and copyrights
6. What is the main difference between patents and trade secrets?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A trade secret is public, whereas a patent is confidential.
A trade secret protects a process, whereas a patent protects a machine.
A trade secret is confidential, whereas a patent is public.
A trade secret protects a machine, whereas a patent protects a process.
None of these is correct.
7. What are the two basic requirements to register a trademark with the USPTO?
8. The USPTO publishes the Official Gazette to give public notice about patents
and trademarks.
A. True
B. False
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.9. What must an author do to protect his or her copyrighted works?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Mark it with a ©.
Register it with the U.S. Copyright Office.
Nothing, copyright protection is automatic.
Pay a fee to the Library of Congress.
None of these is correct.
10. Which DMCA safe harbor is called the “conduit” exception?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Transitory communications safe harbor
System caching safe harbor
Information storage safe harbor
Information location tools safe harbor
None of these is correct.
11. Which type of IP protection is governed by federal and state law?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
Patents
Copyrights
Trademarks
Patents and copyrights
None of these is correct.
12. What is the trademark registration period?
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
10 years
14 years
20 years
70 years
None of these is correct.
13. Why is it important to know who is the owner of a copyrighted work?
14. What must a person show to prove trademark infringement?
A. Ownership of a trademark
B. That the defendant used a similar trademark in commerce
C. That the defendant’s use of a similar trademark is likely to confuse
consumers
D. Ownership of a trademark and that the defendant used a similar trademark
in commerce
E. Ownership of a trademark, that the defendant used a similar trademark in
commerce, and that the defendant’s use of a similar trademark is likely to
confuse consumers
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.15. What is cybersquatting?
A. When a person owns a patent but does not make, use, or sell his or her
invention
B. When a person registers a domain name that is a registered trademark or
trade name of another entity
C. When a person uses the copyrighted materials of another without
appropriate acknowledgment
D. When a person publicly advertises the sensitive confidential information of a
business or other entity on the internet
E. None of these is correct.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.ENDNOTES
1. Internet World Stats, “Internet Usage Statistics: World Internet Users and
Population Stats,” March 3, 2020. http://www.internetworldstats.com/stats.htm
(accessed April 30, 2020).
2. U.S. Constitution, Art. 1, sec. 8, cl. 8.
3. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 1-376.
4. Leahy-Smith America Invents Act, Pub. L. No. 112-29, 125 Stat. 284 (2011).
5. United States Patent and Trademark Office, “FY 2019 Performance and
Accountability Report,” November 2019.
https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/USPTOFY19PAR.pdf
(accessed April 30, 2020).
6. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 102.
7. Plant Variety Protection Act (1970), U.S. Code Vol. 7, sec. 2421, 2422, 2541.
8. Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303 (1980).
9. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 102(b).
10. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 101.
11. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 103.
12. Hartford v. Moore, 181 F. 132 (S.D.N.Y. 1910).
13. United States Patent and Trademark Office, “Data Visualization Center,
Traditional Total Pendency,” April 2020.
https://www.uspto.gov/corda/dashboards/patents/main.dashxml?
CTNAVID=1004 (accessed April 30, 2020).
14. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 7.
15. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 282.
16. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 284.
17. U.S. Code, Vol. 35, sec. 285.
18. U.S. Code, Vol. 18, sec. 1831-1839.
19. William L. Jones et al. v. Peggy Hamilton, Alabama Court of Civil Appeals,
Opinion, January 22, 2010. Available at:
https://law.justia.com/cases/alabama/court-of-appeals-civil/2010/2081077.html
(accessed April 30, 2020).
20. U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1051 et seq.
21. United States Patent and Trademark Office, “FY 2019 Performance and
Accountability Report,” November 2019.
https://www.uspto.gov/sites/default/files/documents/USPTOFY19PAR.pdf
(accessed April 30, 2020).
22. U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1114.
23. U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1065.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1111.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1051.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1051.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1052.
United States Patent and Trademark Office, “Data Visualization Center, Total
Pendency,” April 2020.
https://www.uspto.gov/dashboards/trademarks/main.dashxml (accessed July 11,
2020).
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, “Trademark Manual of Examining Procedure,
Section 1200,” October 2018.
https://tmep.uspto.gov/RDMS/TMEP/current#/current/TMEP-1200d1e3042.html
(accessed April 30, 2020).
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1063.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1058.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1059.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1114.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1125.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1114.
Toys “R” Us v. Akkaoui, 40 U.S.P.Q.2d (BNA) 1836 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 29, 1996).
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1116.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1117.
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1117.
Verisign, “The Verisign Domain Name Industry Brief,” March 2020.
https://www.verisign.com/assets/domain-name-report-Q42019.pdf (accessed
April 30, 2020).
U.S. Code, Vol. 15, sec. 1125(d).
World Intellectual Property Organization, “WIPO Arbitration and Mediation
Center, 2019 Review,” April 8, 2020.
https://www.wipo.int/amc/en/new/2019review.html (accessed April 30, 2020).
Copyright Act (1976), U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 101 et seq.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 102(a).
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 106.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 101.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 302.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 411.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 410.
U.S. Copyright Office, “Registration Processing Times April 1-September 30,
2019,” 2019. https://www.copyright.gov/registration/docs/processing-times-
faqs.pdf (accessed April 30, 2020).
U.S. Copyright Office, “I’ve Heard About a ‘Poor Man’s Copyright.’ What Is It?”
Undated. https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-general.html#poorman
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
(accessed April 30, 2020).
World Intellectual Property Organization, “Berne Convention for the Protection
of Literary and Artistic Works,” Undated.
https://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne/ (accessed April 30, 2020).
Williams v. Crichton, 84 F.3d 581, 590 (2d Cir. 1996).
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 504.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 107.
U.S. Copyright Office, “More Information on Fair Use,” April 2020.
https://www.copyright.gov/fair-use/more-info.html (accessed April 29, 2020).
Bill Graham Archives v. Dorling Kindersley Ltd., 448 F.3d 605 (2d Cir. 2006).
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, Pub. L. No. 105-304, 112 Stat. 2860 (1998),
codified in scattered sections of U.S. Code Vol. 17.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 1201.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 1201.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 1204.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 512.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 512(k)(1).
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 512.
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 512(a).
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 512(c)(3).
U.S. Code, Vol. 17, sec. 117.
Google,”Content Delistings Due to Copyright,” Undated.
https://transparencyreport.google.com/copyright/overview?hl=en (accessed
April 30, 2020).
A&M Records v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2001).
HathiTrust, “Statistics Information,” Updated daily.
http://www.hathitrust.org/statistics_info (accessed April 30, 2020).
Authors Guild, Inc. v. HathiTrust, 755 F.3d 87 (2d Cir. 2014).
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-02-14 20:47:13.
