© mirjanajovic/DigitalVision Vectors/Getty Images
Glossary of Key Terms
A
Acceptable use policy (AUP) |
States the proper use of an organization’s information technology resources.
Actus reus |
A Latin term used to describe a crime. It means “guilty act.”
Administrative procedure |
Sets forth the process under which administrative agencies make and enforce
rules.
Administrative safeguards |
Management and regulatory controls. These safeguards are usually policies,
standards, guidelines, and procedures. They also can be the laws an
organization must follow.
Adware |
Software that displays advertising banners, redirects a user to websites, and
conducts advertising on a user’s computer. Adware also displays pop-up
advertisements.
Affidavit |
A sworn written statement.
Annual rate of occurrence (ARO) |
How many times a threat might affect an organization during a 1-year time
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.frame.
Annualized loss expectancy (ALE) |
The amount of loss that an organization can expect to have each year because
of a particular risk. ALE is often expressed as the equation: ALE = SLE × ARO.
SLE is single loss expectancy. ARO is annual rate of occurrence.
Answer |
A defendant’s response to a plaintiff’s complaint.
Appellate jurisdiction |
The power of a court to review a decision made by a lower court.
Audit |
An evaluation and verification that certain objectives are met.
Authentication |
The process through which a user proves his or her identity to access an
information technology resource.
Authorization |
A written consent that allows protected health information (PHI) to be shared.
Patients sign consents. These documents are required for many purposes. This
term is defined by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Availability |
The security goal of ensuring that you can access information systems and their
data when you need them. They must be available in a dependable and timely
manner.
B
Baseline |
A minimum level of behavior or action that must be met in order to comply with a
governance document. Baselines are often specified in standards.
Beyond a reasonable doubt |
The standard of proof in a criminal case.
Biometric data |
Data about a person’s physical or behavioral traits used to identify a particular
person. Biometric data is unique because it cannot be changed.
Blog |
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.A personal online journal. Also called a weblog.
Bluetooth |
A wireless communication technology designed to replace the data cables
connecting devices.
Board of directors (BOD) |
An organization’s governing body that plans an organization’s strategic
direction. A BOD is required by law to act with due care and in the best interests
of the organization.
Breach notification law |
A law that requires that state residents be notified if an entity experiences a
security breach that compromises their personal data.
Browsewrap contract |
An agreement where the complete terms of the agreement are presented on a
webpage. A user does not have to take any affirmative action to accept the
terms of the agreement other than to use the webpage.
Business associates |
Organizations that perform a healthcare activity on behalf of a covered entity.
This term is defined by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Business continuity (BC) plans |
Plans that address the recovery of an organization’s business processes and
functions in the event of a disaster. Business continuity plans tend to be
comprehensive business plans for returning an organization to normal operating
conditions.
Business impact analysis (BIA) |
A process that identifies key business operations and the resources used to
support those processes. A business impact analysis also identifies maximum
tolerable downtime for critical business functions.
C
Chain of custody |
Documentation that shows how evidence is collected, used, and handled
throughout the lifetime of a case. A chain of custody document shows who
obtained evidence, where and when it was obtained, who secured it, and who
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.had control or possession of it.
Checklist test |
A basic type of disaster recovery and business continuity test that checks to
make sure that supplies and inventory items needed for an organization’s
business recovery are on hand.
Chief information officer (CIO) |
An organization’s senior information technology official. This role focuses on
developing an organization’s own IT resources.
Chief information security officer (CISO) |
An organization’s senior information security official.
Chief technology officer (CTO) |
An organization’s most senior technology official. This role focuses on
developing an organization’s technology products.
Civil procedure |
Sets forth the procedures and processes that courts use to conduct civil trials.
Clickstream |
The data trail that an internet user creates while browsing. A clickstream is a
record of the pages that a computer user visits when navigating on a particular
website.
Clickwrap contract |
An agreement in which the complete terms of the agreement are presented on a
computer screen, usually in the form of a pop-up window. A user must take an
affirmative action to accept the terms of the agreement.
Cloud computing |
A type of computing where both applications and infrastructure capabilities can
be provided to end users through the internet.
Code analysis |
A category of computer forensics that focuses on examining programming code
for malicious code or signatures. Code analysis also is known as malware
forensics.
Code law |
Law that is enacted by legislatures.
Cold site |
A backup site for disaster recovery and business continuity planning purposes
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.that is little more than reserved space. A cold site does not have any hardware
or equipment ready for business operations. It will have electrical service, but
most likely will not have network connectivity. It can take weeks to months for an
organization to ready a cold site for business operations.
Common law |
A body of law that is developed because of legal tradition and court cases. The
U.S. common law is a body of law that was inherited from England.
Compensatory damages |
A money award that compensates a non-breaching party for the other party’s
breach. These damages place the non-breaching party in the same position he
or she would have been in had the contract been fully performed.
Competitive edge |
The designs, blueprints, or plans that make an organization’s product or service
unique.
Complaint |
The first document filed in a civil case. A plaintiff files it and it states the plaintiff’s
cause of action against a defendant.
Complete performance |
Contractual performance where a party to a contract satisfies all of his or her
promises.
Compliance |
The action of following applicable laws and rules and regulations.
Computer forensics |
The scientific process of collecting and examining data that is stored on or
received or transmitted by an electronic device. Computer forensics also is
called system forensics, digital forensics, computer forensic analysis, computer
examination, data recovery, or inforensics.
Concurrent jurisdiction |
Jurisdiction that is shared by several different courts.
Confidentiality |
The security goal of ensuring that only authorized persons can access
information systems and their data.
Conflict of interest |
Any situation where a person’s private interests and professional obligations
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.collide. Independent observers might question whether a person’s private
interests improperly influence his or her professional decisions.
Consequential damages |
A money award that compensates the non-breaching party for foreseeable
damages that arise from circumstances outside of the contract.
Consideration |
The mutual exchange of value between contracting parties. Consideration can
be expressed as an exchange of money, goods, or a promise to perform a
certain action.
Consumer goods |
Items that an individual purchases for personal, family, or household use.
Consumer services |
Services that an individual purchases for personal, family, or household use.
Contract |
A legally binding agreement that is enforceable in court.
Contract of adhesion |
A contract where one party has very little bargaining power. A contract of
adhesion is a “take it or leave it” contract.
Contractual capacity |
A legal term that refers to the ability of a party to enter into a contract.
Control |
Any protective action that reduces information security risks. These actions may
eliminate or lessen vulnerabilities, control threats, or reduce risk. Safeguards is
another term for controls.
Cookie |
A small string of code that a website stores on a user’s computer. Websites use
cookies to remember specific information about visitors to the site.
Copyrights |
Used to protect books, art, music, videos, computer programs, and other
creative works.
Covered entity |
A health plan, healthcare clearing house, or any other healthcare provider that
transmits certain types of health information in electronic form. Such an entity
must follow the HIPAA Security and Privacy Rules. This term is defined by the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Criminal procedure |
Sets forth the procedures and processes that courts follow in criminal law cases.
Cryptography |
The science and practice of hiding information so that unauthorized persons
cannot read it.
D
Data destruction policies |
State how data is to be destroyed when it reaches the end of its life cycle.
Data retention policies |
State how data is to be controlled throughout its life cycle.
Deceptive trade practices |
Any commercial practice that uses false or misleading claims to get customers
to buy a product or service.
Defamation |
A tort that involves maliciously saying false things about another person.
Denial of service (DoS) attack |
Attack that disrupts information systems so that they are no longer available to
users.
Design patents |
Issued to protect new and original ornamental designs for manufactured objects.
Digital evidence |
Evidence collected from an electronic device.
Disaster |
A sudden, unplanned event that negatively affects the organization’s critical
business functions for an unknown period.
Disaster recovery (DR) plans |
Plans that address the recovery of an organization’s information technology
systems in the event of a disaster.
Disclosure |
Refers to how a covered entity shares protected health information with other
organizations that may not be affiliated with it. This term is defined by the Health
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Disclosure controls |
A term used in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. It refers to processes and procedures
that a company uses to make sure that it makes timely disclosures to the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission.
Discovery |
The legal process used to gather evidence in a lawsuit.
Distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack |
An attack that uses multiple systems to disrupt other information systems so
that they are no longer available to users.
Diversity of citizenship jurisdiction |
Refers to the power of federal courts to hear disputes between citizens of
different states only when they are above a certain dollar amount.
Dividend |
Represents a shareholder’s portion of the company’s earnings.
Docket |
The official schedule of a court and the events in the cases pending before a
court. Many courts publish their dockets online.
Due process |
The principle that all parties in a case are entitled to a fair and consistent
process within the courts.
Dumpster diving |
Looking through discarded trash for personal information.
Duty of due care |
A person’s obligation to avoid acts or omissions that can harm others.
Duty to mitigate |
A non-breaching party’s obligation not to aggravate the harm caused by a
breach.
E
Electronic protected health information (EPHI) |
Patient health information that is computer based. It is PHI stored electronically.
This term is defined by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.End user license agreement (EULA) |
A contract between the manufacturer or distributor of a piece of software or a
service and the end user.
Exploit |
A successful attack against a vulnerability.
Exposure factor |
The percentage of asset loss that is likely to be caused by an identified threat or
vulnerability.
External attacker |
An attacker that has no current relationship with the organization it is attacking.
F
Fair information practice principles |
Guidelines used to help describe how personal information should be collected
and used.
Fair use |
A copyright law concept that states some use of copyrighted works in limited
ways is not copyright infringement.
Federal question jurisdiction |
Refers to the power of federal courts to hear only disputes about federal laws or
constitutional issues.
Felonies |
The greater of two types of crimes. Felonies are more serious than
misdemeanors. They are generally punishable by more than 1 year in prison.
Flaming |
A series of insulting communications between internet users. Flaming often
occurs on online discussion boards.
Forensic duplicate image |
An exact copy of an electronic media storage device. A bit-by-bit copy includes
deleted files, slack space, and areas of the storage device that a normal file
copy would not include.
Form 8-K |
A report that a public company must file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Commission. A company must file it within 4 days of experiencing a major event
that affects shareholders and investors.
Form 10-K |
A report that a public company must file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission at the end of its fiscal year. It is a detailed and comprehensive
report on the company’s financial condition.
Form 10-Q |
A report that a public company must file with the U.S. Securities and Exchange
Commission at the end of each fiscal quarter. It is a report on the company’s
financial condition at the end of its first three quarters in a fiscal year.
Fruit of the poisonous tree doctrine |
A legal doctrine that states that evidence that is not gathered lawfully is tainted
with illegality. Illegally gathered evidence cannot be used in court. In addition,
any subsequent evidence gathered because of the illegally obtained evidence
cannot be used in court either.
Full interruption test |
A disaster recovery and business continuity test where an organization stops all
of its normal business operations and transfers those operations to its backup
site. This is the most comprehensive form of disaster recovery and business
continuity plan testing. It also is the most expensive.
G
Global positioning system (GPS) |
A navigation technology that uses satellites above the Earth to compute the
location of a GPS receiver.
Guidelines |
Recommended actions and operational guides to users, IT staff, operations
staff, and others when a specific standard does not apply.
H
Hearsay |
Any out-of-court statement made by a person that is offered to prove some
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.issue in a case. Gossip is a common example of hearsay.
Hot site |
An operational backup site for disaster recovery and business continuity
planning purposes. It has equipment and infrastructure that is fully compatible
with an organization’s main facility. It is not staffed with people. A hot site can
become operational within minutes to hours after a disaster.
I
Identity theft |
A crime that takes place when a person’s personally identifiable information is
used without permission in order to commit other crimes.
Incident |
An event that adversely affects the confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability of
an organization’s data and information technology systems.
Incident response (IR) |
A contingency plan that helps an organization respond to attacks against an
organization’s information technology infrastructure.
Incomplete performance |
Contractual performance in which a party to a contract does not perform his or
her contractual promises.
Information |
Intelligence, knowledge, and data. You can store information in paper or
electronic form.
Information security |
The study and practice of protecting information. The main goal of information
security is to protect its confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
Information security governance (ISG) |
Executive management’s responsibility to provide strategic direction, oversight,
and accountability for an organization’s information and information systems
resources.
Information security management (ISM) |
How an organization manages its day-to-day security activities. It makes sure
that the policies dictated by the executive management team as part of its
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.governance function are properly implemented.
Inspector general (IG) |
A federal government official who independently evaluates the performance of
federal agencies. Inspectors general are independent officials.
Integrity |
The security goal of ensuring that no changes are made to information systems
and their data without permission.
Intellectual property |
The area of law that protects a person’s creative ideas, inventions, and
innovations. It is protected by patents, trade secrets, trademarks, and copyright.
Internal attacker |
An attacker that has a current relationship with the organization he or she is
attacking. It can be an angry employee.
Internal controls |
A term used in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. It refers to the processes and
procedures that a company uses to provide reasonable assurance that its
financial reports are reliable.
Internet of Things (IoT) |
This term is used broadly to refer to any device that collects and shares data
over the internet.
J
Judicial review |
A court’s review of any issue. For federal courts, this refers to the authority of a
court to declare actions unconstitutional.
Jurisdiction |
The power of a court to hear a particular type of case. It also refers to the power
of a court to hear cases involving people in a geographical area. For instance, a
state court has the power to decide cases raised by citizens of that state.
L
Least privilege |
A rule that systems should run with the lowest level of permissions needed to
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.complete tasks. This means users should have the least amount of access
needed to do their jobs.
Legislative history |
The materials generated while creating laws. It includes committee reports and
hearings. It also includes transcripts of debate and reports issued by
legislatures. The legislative history is reviewed to help determine what a
legislature intended when it created a law.
Libel |
Written defamation.
Liquidated damages |
A contractual grant of money damages that the parties determined before
entering into a contract.
Locard’s exchange principle |
A basic assumption in forensic science that states that people always leave
traces of their activities when they interact with other people or with other
objects.
M
Mailbox rule |
A common law rule that states that an acceptance is valid as soon as an offeree
places it in the mail.
Mala in se |
A Latin term used to describe conduct that is inherently wrong. It means “evil in
itself.”
Mala prohibita |
A Latin term used to describe conduct that society prohibits. It means “wrong
because it is prohibited.”
Malware |
A term that refers to any software that performs harmful, unauthorized, or
unknown activity. The word malware combines the words malicious and
software.
Mantrap |
A physical security safeguard that controls entry into a protected area. This
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.entry method has two sets of doors on either end of a small room. When a
person enters a mantrap through one set of doors, that first set must close
before the second set can open. Often a person entering a facility via a mantrap
must present different credentials at each set of doors to gain access.
Maximum tolerable downtime (MTD) |
The amount of time that critical business processes and resources can be
offline before an organization begins to experience irreparable business harm.
Media analysis |
A category of computer forensics that focuses on collecting and examining data
stored on physical media.
Medical identity theft |
A specialized type of identity theft. A crime that takes place when a person’s
personally identifiable health information is used without permission in order to
receive medical services or goods.
Mens rea |
A Latin term used to describe the state of mind of a criminal. It means “guilty
mind.”
Minimum necessary rule |
A rule that covered entities may only disclose the amount of PHI absolutely
necessary to carry out a particular function. This term is defined by the Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Mirror image rule |
A common law rule that states that an offer and acceptance must contain
identical terms.
Mirrored site |
A fully operational backup site for disaster recovery and business continuity
planning purposes. This site actively runs an organization’s information
technology functions in parallel with the organization’s mail processing facility. It
is fully staffed and has all necessary data and equipment to continue business
operations.
Misdemeanor |
The lesser of two types of crimes. Misdemeanors are less serious than felonies.
They are generally punishable by no more than 1 year in prison.
Multifactor authentication |
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.A method of authentication that requires users to prove their identity in two or
more ways.
N
National security systems |
Information technology systems that hold military, defense, and intelligence
information.
Near Field Communication (NFC) |
A very short-range wireless communication technology.
Need to know |
A rule that users should have access to only the information they need to do
their jobs.
Network analysis |
A category of computer forensics that focuses on capturing and examining
network traffic. It includes reviewing transaction logs and using real-time
monitoring to identify and locate evidence.
Network banner |
A warning banner that provides notice of legal rights to users of computer
networks. They are generally displayed as a computer user logs into a network
or on an entity’s home page.
Nominal damages |
A money award to the non-breaching party even though he or she has not
suffered any financial loss because of a breach of contract.
Nonpublic personal information (NPI) |
Any personally identifiable financial information that a consumer provides to a
financial institution. This term is defined by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
O
Objection |
A formal protest made by an attorney to a trial court judge. An attorney usually
makes an objection if the opposing party is asking questions or submitting
evidence that is inappropriate or violates a trial court rule.
Offer |
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.An invitation made by an offeror to an offeree to enter into a contract.
Offeree |
A person who receives an offer.
Offeror |
A person who makes an offer.
Online profiling |
The practice of tracking a user’s actions on the internet in order to create a
profile of that user. The profile can be used to direct targeted advertising toward
a particular user.
Operational planning |
Day-to-day business planning.
Original jurisdiction |
The authority of a court to hear a dispute between parties in the first instance,
rather than on appeal.
P
Parallel test |
A disaster recovery and business continuity test where an organization tests its
ability to recover its information technology systems and its business data. In
this type of test, the organization brings its backup recovery sites online. It will
then use historical business data to test the operations of those systems.
Parental controls |
Software that allows a parent to control a child’s activity on a computer. Parental
controls can be used to restrict access to certain content, such as violent
games, or to specific websites. They also can restrict the times a child can use a
computer.
Patch |
A piece of software or code that fixes a program’s security vulnerabilities.
Patches are available for many types of software, including operating systems.
Patent prosecution |
The actions that the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office must complete in order
to reject a patent application or issue a patent.
Patents |
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Used to protect inventions such as machines, processes, designs, and
specialized plants.
Pen register devices |
Devices that monitor outgoing transmission data. They record dialing, routing,
signaling, or address information.
Persistent data |
Data that is stored on a hard drive or other storage media. It is preserved when
an electronic device is turned off.
Personal jurisdiction |
A court’s ability to exercise power over a defendant.
Personally identifiable information (PII) |
Information that can be used to identify a specific person. This can be
something used alone, such as a person’s name. Or it can be pieces of data
that, when combined, can be used to identify someone. PII is often defined with
reference to a particular law. It can include elements such as name, address,
Zip code, gender, GPS location, telephone number, or account numbers.
Physical safeguard |
Controls that keep unauthorized individuals out of a building or other controlled
areas. You can also use them to keep unauthorized individuals from using an
information system. Examples include keycard access to buildings, fences, and
intrusion monitoring systems.
Plant patents |
Issued to protect inventions or discoveries of new varieties of plants that are
reproduced asexually.
Pleadings |
Documents filed in a court case.
Policy |
An organization’s high-level statement of information security direction and
goals. Policies are the highest level governance document.
Pop-up advertisements |
Advertisements that open a new web browser window to display the
advertisement.
Precedent |
This doctrine means that courts will look at prior cases to determine the
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.appropriate resolution for new cases.
Preemption |
A legal concept that means that a higher-ranking law will exclude or preempt a
lower-ranking law on the same subject.
Preponderance of the evidence |
The standard of proof in a civil case. It means that it is more probable than not
that an action (or wrong) took place.
Pretexting |
Obtaining unauthorized access to a customer’s sensitive financial information
through false or misleading actions. Also called social engineering.
Prior art |
Evidence of public knowledge about an invention that existed before a claimed
invention or discovery date.
Privacy |
A person’s right to have control of his or her own personal data. The person has
the right to specify how that data is collected, used, and shared.
Privacy impact assessment (PIA) |
A review of how a federal agency’s information technology systems process
personal information. The E-Government Act of 2002 requires federal agencies
to conduct these assessments.
Private cause of action |
A legal concept that describes a person’s right to sue another for harm that the
latter caused.
Privately held company |
A company held by a small group of private investors.
Probative evidence |
Probative evidence is evidence that proves or disproves a legal element in a
case. If evidence is not probative, then it can be excluded from a trial. Probative
evidence also is known as relevant evidence.
Procedural law |
Branches of law that deal with processes that courts use to decide cases.
Procedures |
Detailed step-by-step tasks, or checklists, that should be performed to achieve a
certain goal or task. Procedures are the lowest level governance document.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Protected health information (PHI) |
Any individually identifiable information about the past, present, or future health
of a person. It includes mental and physical health data. This term is defined by
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act.
Proxy server |
A server that accepts internet requests and retrieves the data. The proxy server
can filter content to ensure that users view only acceptable content. Libraries
and schools use proxy servers to comply with the Children’s Internet Protection
Act (CIPA).
Public company |
A publicly traded company owned by several different investors. Investors own a
percentage of the company through stock purchases. The stock of a public
company is traded on a stock exchange.
Public domain |
Refers to the collection of works that are free for public use. It includes works
where the copyright has expired. It also includes some government works.
Public employees |
Employees that work for the federal or state government.
Public records |
Records required by law to be made available to the public. These types of
records are made or filed by a governmental entity.
Public relations (PR) |
A marketing field that manages an organization’s public image.
Q
Qualitative risk analysis |
A risk analysis method that uses scenarios and ratings systems to calculate risk
and potential harm. Unlike quantitative risk analysis, qualitative risk analysis
does not attempt to assign money value to assets and risk.
Quantitative risk analysis |
A risk analysis method that uses real money costs and values to determine the
potential monetary impact of threats and vulnerabilities.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.R
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) |
A wireless technology that uses radio waves to transmit data to a receiver.
Ransomware |
A type of malware that encrypts data to make it inaccessible, or may lock
information systems, until an organization pays the attacker to decrypt the data
or unlock the system.
Realized risk |
The loss that an organization has when a potential threat actually occurs.
Reasonable person standard |
A legal concept used to describe an ordinary person. This fictitious ordinary
person is used to represent how an average person would think and act.
Record |
Any information about a person that a federal agency maintains. This term is
defined in the Privacy Act of 1974.
Red Flag |
Any pattern, practice, or activity that may indicate identity theft. This term is
defined by the Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003.
Remedy |
Legal relief that a court grants to an injured party.
Repudiation |
A refusal to perform a contract duty.
Residual risk |
The amount of risk left over after safeguards lessen a vulnerability or threat.
Risk |
The chance, or probability, that a threat can exploit a vulnerability. The concept
of risk includes an understanding that an exploited vulnerability has a negative
business impact.
Risk acceptance |
A business decision to accept an assessed risk and take no action against it.
Risk assessment (RA) |
A process for identifying threats and vulnerabilities that an organization faces.
Risk assessments can be quantitative, qualitative, or a combination of both.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Risk avoidance |
A business decision to apply safeguards to avoid a negative impact.
Risk management (RM) |
The process that an organization uses to identify risks, assess them, and
reduce them to an acceptable level.
Risk mitigation |
A business decision to apply safeguards to lessen a negative impact.
Risk transfer |
A business decision to transfer risk to a third party to avoid that risk.
S
Safe harbor |
A legal concept that refers to an action someone can take to show a good-faith
effort to stay within the law and avoid prosecution.
Safeguard |
Any protective action that reduces information security risks. They may
eliminate or lessen vulnerabilities, control threats, or reduce risk. Safeguards
also are called controls.
Seal program |
A program administered by a trusted organization that verifies that another
organization meets recognized privacy practices.
Search engine |
A program that retrieves files and data from a computer network. Search
engines are used to search the internet for information.
Securities |
The general term used to describe financial instruments that are traded on a
stock exchange. Stocks and bonds are securities.
Security breach |
Any compromise of a computer system that results in the loss of personally
identifiable information.
Separation of duties |
A rule that two or more employees must split critical task functions. Thus, no
one employee knows all of the steps required to complete the critical task.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Servicemark |
Used to protect words, logos, symbols, or slogans that identify a service.
Shoulder surfing |
Looking over the shoulder of another person to obtain sensitive information. The
attacker does not have permission to see it. This term usually describes an
attack in which a person tries to learn sensitive information by viewing
keystrokes on a monitor or keyboard.
Shrinkwrap contract |
A software licensing agreement where the complete terms of the agreement are
in a box containing the physical-media software.
Simulation test |
A disaster recovery and business continuity test where an organization role-
plays a specific disaster scenario. This type of test does not interrupt normal
business operations and activities.
Single loss expectancy (SLE) |
The amount of money that an organization stands to lose every time a specified
risk is realized.
Single point of failure |
In an information system, a piece of hardware or application critical to the entire
system’s functioning. If that single item fails, then a critical portion or the entire
system could fail. For networks, single points of failure could be firewalls,
routers, switches, or hubs.
Slander |
Oral defamation.
Social engineering |
An attack that relies on human interaction. They often involve tricking other
people to break security rules so the attacker can gain information about
computer systems. This type of attack is not technical.
Social networking sites |
Website applications that allow users to post information about themselves.
Software as a Service (SaaS) |
Commerce model where a vendor hosts a web-based application and provides
that application to its customers through the internet.
Spam |
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Unsolicited email. Spam is usually advertising or promotional email.
Specific performance |
A legal term that refers to situations where a court orders a party to complete his
or her contractual duties.
Stakeholders |
People that are affected by a policy, standard, guideline, or procedure. They are
people who have an interest in a policy document.
Standards |
Mandatory activities, actions, or rules. Standards must be met in order to
achieve policy goals. Standards are usually technology neutral.
Statute of frauds |
A common law rule that states that certain types of contracts must be in writing
and signed by the contracting parties.
Statute of limitations |
The time period stated by law during which a plaintiff must take legal action
against a wrongdoer. A plaintiff who does not take legal action within the stated
time is forever barred from bringing that action in the future.
Strategic planning |
Long-term business planning.
Strict liability |
A legal concept that means that people can be held responsible for their actions
even if they did not intend to cause harm to another person.
Subject matter jurisdiction |
The power of a court to decide certain types of cases.
Substantial performance |
Contractual performance in which a party to a contract satisfies all of his or her
material promises. Substantial performance does not meet all contract terms.
Nonperformance of some terms may result in a minor breach of contract.
Substantive law |
Branches of law that deal with particular legal subject matter, arranged by type.
Property law, contract law, and tort law are all substantive areas of law.
System of records notice (SORN) |
A federal agency’s notice about agency record-keeping systems that can
retrieve records through the use of a personal identifier. The Privacy Act of 1974
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.requires federal agencies to provide these notices.
T
Tactical planning |
Short- to medium-term business planning.
Targeted advertising |
Advertising designed to appeal to a consumer’s specific interests.
Technical safeguard |
Controls implemented in an information system’s hardware and software.
Technical controls include passwords, access control mechanisms, and
automated logging. They improve the system’s security.
Technology protection measure (TPM) |
Technology used to filter objectionable content. CIPA requires the use of a TPM
to protect children from objectionable content.
Threat |
Any danger that takes advantage of a vulnerability. Threats are unintentional or
intentional.
Tort |
A wrongful act or harm for which a civil action can be brought. Tort law governs
disputes between individuals.
Tortfeasor |
A person who commits a tort.
Trade secrets |
Used to protect formulas, processes, and methods that give a business a
competitive edge.
Trademarks |
Used to protect words, logos, symbols, or slogans that identify a product or
service.
Trap and trace devices |
Devices that monitor incoming transmission data. They capture incoming
electronic signals that identify the originating transmission data.
Two-factor authentication |
A method of authentication that requires users to prove their identity in two
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.ways.
U
Unfair trade practices |
Any commercial practices that a consumer cannot avoid and that cause injury.
Use |
How a covered entity shares or handles protected health information within its
organization. This term is defined by the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act.
User credentials |
Pieces of information used to access information technology resources. User
credentials include passwords, personal identification numbers (PINs), tokens,
smart cards, and biometric data.
Utility patents |
Issued to protect inventions and discoveries such as machines, manufactured
products, processes, and compositions of matter. They are the most common
type of patent.
V
Volatile data |
Data that is stored in the memory of an electronic device. It is lost when an
electronic device is turned off.
Vulnerability |
A weakness or flaw in an information system. Exploiting a vulnerability harms
information security. You reduce them by applying security safeguards.
W
Walk-through test |
A basic type of disaster recovery and business continuity test that reviews a
disaster recovery/business continuity plan to make sure that all of the
assumptions and tasks stated in the plan are correct. This type of test is
sometimes called a tabletop walk-through test or tabletop test.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.Warm site |
A partially equipped backup site for disaster recovery and business continuity
planning purposes. A warm site is space that contains some, but not all, of the
equipment and infrastructure that an organization needs to continue operations
in the event of a disaster. It is partially prepared for operations and has
electricity and network connectivity.
Web beacon |
A small, invisible electronic file that is placed on a webpage or in an email
message. Also called a “web bug.”
Window of vulnerability |
The period between discovering a vulnerability and reducing or eliminating it.
Workplace privacy |
Privacy issues encountered in the workplace. Hiring and firing practices and
daily performance practices all have potential privacy concerns.
Z
Zero-day vulnerability |
A vulnerability exploited shortly after it is discovered. The attacker exploits it
before the vendor releases a patch.
Grama, J. L. (2020). Legal and privacy issues in information security. Jones & Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Created from westerngovernors-ebooks on 2023-03-28 22:18:41.
